Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 41
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 41

[87213] This is the fifth decade of the first group of fifty, and thus it is ordered toward imploring help against present evils. And this is a figure of the temporal evils that befell David, who suffered persecution from Absalom—and against this was the first decade. Likewise from Saul—and against this the second decade. Likewise from the whole people—and against this the third decade. Likewise from many rivals—and against this the fourth decade. Ps. 35: "Judge, O Lord, those who wrong me." There remains the fifth decade, in which he speaks specifically about things pertaining to the kingdom. And he asks in this decade for divine help against those who attack the kingdom. And to refer this to the mystery, the just man asks against those who attack the kingdom of the Church. This decade is therefore divided into two parts. First he formulates a petition for the state of the kingdom; second, because the kingdom appears to have been troubled through sin, he therefore asks pardon for sin, at Ps. 51: "Have mercy on me, O God." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth a petition against the enemies of the kingdom; second, having been heard, he gives thanks for the glory of the kingdom, at Ps. 45: "My heart has uttered." And because every petition proceeds from desire, therefore concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth his desire; second he adds a prayer, at Ps. 44: "O God, with our ears." Concerning the first he does two things. First he shows the desire he has for God; second he asks for the fulfillment of his desire, at Ps. 43: "Judge me." The title: "Unto the end, understanding, for the sons of Korah." This has been explained in the title of the preceding Psalm; yet another reading has: "Unto the end, with understanding," that is, this Psalm is attributed to the sons of Korah, "with understanding," that is, leading us to the end through understanding. Korah is interpreted as Calvary. Hence those are called sons of Korah who suffer mockery on account of the cross. Thus in 2 Kgs. 2, boys mocked Elisha: "Go up, bald head, go up, bald head"; and Elisha cursed them, and bears devoured them. Those ascend from Bethel who are converted to the faith of Christ from Judah, which was formerly called the house of God. And they are mocked by boys, that is, by Jews using childish understanding, because they are still under a tutor, and they cast in their teeth the cross of Christ. And those two bears devoured them, namely Titus and Vespasian. The Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. In the first he sets forth his desire. In the second he sets forth the sadness that incites the desire, at "My tears have been." Concerning the first he does three things. First he sets forth the desire under a likeness. Second he assigns the reason for the likeness, at "My soul has thirsted." Third he explains the thing desired, at "When shall I come?" He takes the likeness from the deer, which especially has this property: that it crushes the serpent with its hoof, and when it wishes to be renewed, it eats the serpent, and thus it burns from the venom, and then it runs to water, and so it is renewed. As a deer in general desires waters, so the faithful person desires God; yet in particular it is adapted to catechumens and to perfect men. For the catechumen is like a deer that feels in itself the burning of venom, which was introduced by the suggestion of the serpent, Gen. 3. From this venom followed original sin. Rom. 5: "Through one man sin entered into this world." And this venom is the guilt of concupiscence and the guilt of the first sin. And therefore he ought to desire the font of Baptism. Zech. 13: "There shall be a fountain open to the house of Jacob for the washing of sins." Ezek. 36: "I will pour out upon you clean water." The perfect man, however, is like a deer established on the rock. Ps. 18: "Who made my feet like the feet of deer." "My soul has thirsted." He has now eaten, that is, destroyed sin. Sir. 21: "Flee from sin as from the face of a serpent." And therefore he has nothing in the world that he desires; and so he desires to come to the fountain of life. And therefore, because this likeness suits both catechumens and perfect men, this Psalm is sung in the office of Baptism on Holy Saturday and Pentecost when the solemn Baptism takes place, with respect to catechumens. Likewise it is sung with funeral rites, because it suits perfect men approaching the fountain of eternal life. "So does my soul long for you, O God." Here he applies the likeness. "My soul desires" with interior affection. Is. 26: "My soul has desired you in the night." Lam. 3: "The Lord is my portion, said my soul." But is there a fountain of waters in God? Yes; hence he says, "My soul has thirsted for God, the living fountain." A fountain is called one that springs forth and produces living waters, and that unceasingly and unfailingly sends forth waters. Every water of graces flows from that fountain, namely from God the Father. Jer. 2: "They have forsaken the fountain of living water." Likewise it flows from the Son, also insofar as he is God. Ps. 36: "With you is the fountain of life." "The fountain of wisdom is the word of God," Sir. 1. Likewise from the Holy Spirit. Jn. 4: "It shall become in him a fountain of water springing up into eternal life." And Jn. 7: "This he said of the Spirit whom those who believed in him were to receive." Therefore, because he himself is the fountain, my soul has thirsted for him. Thirst designates desire with anxiety. Thus this man signifies that he suffers anxiety, not only from the delay of the thing desired, but on account of the evils that afflict here. Mt. 5: "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for justice, for they shall be satisfied." But from this fountain he desires this, namely, "When shall I come?" These are the words of one who desires, and they express the desire of the catechumen for Baptism; and thus the sense is: when shall I come to the sacred Baptism of Christ? Mt. 11: "Come to me," etc. Ps. 34: "Come, children," etc. This, as Augustine says, is fitting for catechumens, because from the beginning catechumens, until they became adults, were not admitted to the sacred mysteries but could attend only until the Gospel. Hence he says, "When shall I come and appear?" Literally, with others, before the face of the Lord, that is, to the sacraments of Christ. Likewise it is fitting for perfect men, and the sense is: "When shall I come and appear," that is, so that I may see you face to face, because now I am far from you, since I see you through faith? But when I shall see you through direct vision, then I shall be near. Phil. 1: "Having a desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ." And he does not say, "The Lord will appear to me," but "I will appear before the face of the Lord"; because from the fact that I shall see the face of the Lord, I shall be made conspicuous to all, far more than Moses who saw him in this life. 1 Jn. 3: "It has not yet appeared what we shall be; we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him." Rom. 8: "The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared," etc. As if to say: I shall be part of the company of those who see God, and from this I shall be conspicuous and glorious. But the hypocrite is excluded from this vision. Job 13: "No hypocrite shall come into his sight."

[87214] "My tears have been." Here he describes whence he has this desire or anxiety. And first he sets forth the cause. Second he sets forth the remedy he has against it, at "These things I remembered." And first he sets forth the greatness of his sadness. Second he sets forth the cause of this sadness. Concerning the sadness he proceeds thus: first he expresses the greatness of the sadness; second, the effect; third, the continuity. He shows the first when he says, "My tears have been my bread," into which, namely, a man bursts forth from abundant sadness. And this sadness is either over sins that impede the attainment of the thing desired, or over the troubles caused by others. He shows the second when he says, "bread." Bread refreshes; and thus also tears refresh, for a twofold reason. One is that to everyone the activity suited to his state is delightful. Hence the activity suited to sadness is delightful to the sad person, and weeping is the activity of sadness. The other reason is that when heat evaporates outward, it diminishes. And therefore he says that tears are to him like bread, as refreshing him. Or, like bread, because just as he is sustained by bread, so he is sustained in good by tears. He shows the third when he says, "day and night," namely in prosperity and adversity. Jer. 9: "I will weep day and night." And the cause of this is: "while it is said to me daily: Where is your God?" These, if they are the words of pagans, are referred to catechumens; as if to say: we, say the pagans, have a God whom we see, namely the sun. But where is your God, whom you fabricate? Respond: God can be seen, but not by you, because you are not pure of heart. Likewise, if it is said to a converted Jew by an unbelieving Jew: "Where is your God?" Let the Jew converted to the faith respond: where my God is, appears in your punishment, namely of the Jews, because you are scattered. Likewise these are the words of the sinner to the just man placed in affliction; as if to say: where is your God? Why does he not deliver you from the affliction you suffer? Let the just man respond: because these temporal things are not the reward that God gives to his servants, but heavenly things are.

[87215] "These things I remembered." Above, the Psalmist set forth his desire, and the cause of the desire; here, however, he sets forth the remedy against the cause, namely sadness. And concerning this he proposes or does two things. First he sets forth a remedy from his own meditation. Second, from divine help, at "Within myself." Concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes the remedy. Second, through this remedy, the impediment of sadness, at "Why are you sad?" In the remedy he proposes first the meditation. Second, the delight of the mind, at "I poured out." And he assigns the reason for this, at "Because I shall pass." He says therefore, "These things I remembered," namely the taunts of the unbelievers saying, "Where is your God?" Lam. 3: "Remembering I shall remember." And I had consolation of mind, because "I poured out my soul within me." When a liquid is poured out, it is expanded. Hence, because the breadth of heart pertains to joy, which is a certain delight, therefore in the pouring out of the soul is designated delight. Ps. 62: "Pour out your hearts before him." Another reading has, "I poured out my soul upon me." And according to this it is read differently, and the sense is: they say, "Where is your God?" And I, remembering these things, first searched insensible creatures to see if I might find my God; but I found in them certain vestiges of God. Rom. 1: "The invisible things of God, from the creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made." But I proceeded further into the intellectual realities of the soul. "And I poured out my soul upon me," that is, searching carefully I sought whatever is in them, as placing all things before me; like one who extracts everything from a vessel to examine whatever is within. And yet my God is not there. But there is still something above this, and this I did: "Because I shall pass over into the place of the wonderful tabernacle, even to the house of God"; as if to say: all the solace I could have is the hope of tending toward God. And he says two things: namely, where he tends, and how, at "With the voice," etc. Concerning the first, the following imagination is to be taken. In the Old Testament there was a twofold place dedicated to divine worship: namely, the tabernacle, about which we read in Ex. 36. Afterward, as the state and devotion of the people grew, the house of God was built, namely the temple—not like the tabernacle, but as a fixed structure. And David wished to build this, but was forbidden by God. 2 Sam. 7: "Shall you build me a house?" Likewise 1 Chr. 17. But it was promised to him that his son would build the house of God; hence he himself prepared the expenses. And therefore he says: they say to me, "Where is your God?" And so, remembering these things, I delight that I shall find him; and therefore with all my affection I shall tend toward him. "And I shall pass over into the place of the wonderful tabernacle"; as if to say: I shall not rest until I find him. And he says, "I shall pass over," because by the tabernacle, which was mobile, is signified the state of the present Church, which is not perpetual nor stable except until the consummation of the age, and then it will be transferred. And this is said in Rev. 21: "Behold the tabernacle of God with men," that is, the present Church with men, that is, as long as men shall be in this life. And from this I shall pass over to the stable house of God. Ps. 65: "We shall be filled with the good things of your house." Jn. 14: "In my Father's house," etc. And thus he intimates going into the wonderful tabernacle and into the house of God. And it is called the wonderful tabernacle on account of the wonderful things he does for his saints.

[87216] "With the voice." Here is described the manner of passing over to the house of God. And here likewise a certain imagination is to be taken. Now it was the custom that when some went in groups to the tabernacle, they went with joy. Is. 30: "You shall have a song as in the night of a holy solemnity, and joy of heart." Thus one who goes with a pipe goes joyfully; and therefore he says, "I shall go into the place of the tabernacle," etc. And with joy, because "With the voice of exultation and confession, the sound of one feasting." Another reading has, "The sounds of one feasting"; as if to say: I shall go with the sound of one feasting, because at banquets there is a sound of joy; and this is more evident according to the other joys that are there. Let us therefore refer this to the entrance of joy, because there will be three things there. First, there will be exultation over the goods possessed. Is. 35: "They shall obtain joy and gladness." Second, there will be confession of the benefits of grace, because they will acknowledge that they obtained those things through the grace of God; and therefore thanksgiving will follow there, and the voice of praise. Third, there will be spiritual refreshment. Is. 65: "My servants shall eat, and you shall be hungry; my servants shall drink, and you shall thirst," etc. Mt. 5: "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for justice," etc.; and therefore there will be the sound of one feasting. Likewise of festivity, that is, perpetual exultation. Bar. 5: "Look, O Jerusalem, toward the east, and see the joy that comes to you from God." And because all these things exist imperfectly in the Church, he adds, "Why are you sad, O my soul?" Here he applies the remedy against the cause of sadness. And first he removes the feeling. Second he removes its effect. He says therefore, "Why are you sad, O my soul?" When you ought to rejoice, because you are in the tabernacle, and because I shall go to the house of the Lord. Why then are you sad? For small evils are not to be regarded in consideration of eternal goods. Sir. 30: "Drive sadness," namely of the world, "far from you." 2 Cor. 7: "The sadness of the world works death." The effect of sadness is disturbance, because from the disorder of the affections, reason itself is disturbed. And who is speaking? The soul, according to this sense. The soul has two parts: namely, the sensitive part, which he here calls the soul on account of its animality; and the higher reason, which names itself, because each person is most of all that which is best in him. And therefore the higher reason says to the lower: "Why do you disturb me?" And what is the cause? He shows, moreover, that it should not be sad, because there is hope of future confession; and therefore he says, "Hope in the Lord, for I shall yet praise him"; as if to say: hope in God himself, because you will yet come to that which you desire, because, namely, "I shall yet praise him," that is, I still hope for his countenance, either on the way or in the homeland, which is especially the matter of joy. Jas. 5: "Is anyone among you sad? Let him pray. Is anyone in good spirits? Let him sing psalms," etc. "The salvation of my countenance." Here the word "salvation," according to the Gloss, is in the nominative case, and the sense is: I say that I shall praise him. And whom? Namely Christ, in whom there are two natures: the human, namely, by which he is like his mother; and therefore he says, "The salvation of my countenance," that is, bearing my countenance. Lk. 2: "My eyes have seen your salvation," etc. Gen. 49: "I will wait for your salvation, O Lord." Likewise the divine nature; and with respect to this he is my God; therefore he says, "My God." Rom. 9: "From whom is Christ according to the flesh, who is over all things, God blessed forever." Or, according to Jerome, "salvation" is in the accusative case; as if to say: I shall confess to him salvation, that is, the salvation by which he saved me. And what follows, "my God," is joined with what follows. Next he applies the remedy, namely of divine help. Where first he proposes the remedy. Second he explains it. He says therefore, "Within myself." Another reading has, "From myself my soul was disturbed." The first is better; as if to say: what is the reason, I ask, why, O soul, you disturb me? And this disturbance comes because however I turn to myself, I find tribulation within me. Hos. 13: "Your destruction, O Israel, is from yourself; only from me is your help." And therefore Jerome has, "My God, within myself." According to that reading, the sense is: as if to say, the cause of the disturbance is from myself; because, if we refer this to the human race, the corruption of sensuality comes from reason, namely from the sense of the first parent. Likewise every man, by sinning, corrupts his own nature; and therefore after sin, sensuality resists reason all the more. And because there is nothing in me except the cause of disturbance, "therefore I will be mindful of you," that is, I will have recourse to you. Hos. 14: "His memorial is like the wine of Lebanon." And from where? "From the land of the Jordan and of the Hermonites." The Jordan is a river in the Promised Land. Hermon is a certain mountain near the Jordan. And according to the history of 2 Sam. 17, when Absalom went to Jerusalem and took counsel to pursue David, who was beyond the Jordan, then Hushai impeded this; and therefore he says: if I were in as great a tribulation as then, nevertheless "I will be mindful of you." Three things, however, are designated here that are in Baptism. By the Jordan is designated the descent of grace into Baptism. Jas. 1: "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above." "And from the land," because through the influx of grace the earth of the heart is thereby made fruitful. Hermon is interpreted as "anathema," and designates the renunciation we make of the Devil and his pomps in Baptism, because then everyone anathematizes, that is, separates himself from the Devil. "From the little mountain," because this renunciation and grace comes from a humble heart, because God gives grace to the humble, Jas. 4. And the Devil is king over all the children of pride, Job 41.

[87217] "Deep calls to deep." He explains the remedy with respect to two things said: namely, with respect to the disturbance he has in himself, and with respect to the remembrance of God, at "In the day he commanded." As to the first he proposes a likeness and explains its cause. "Deep" in Scripture signifies a multitude of waters. Gen. 1: "Darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of the Lord," etc. It also happens that when waters are generated in great quantity in the air, they can be called a deep. And in these rains there is a certain circulation: because they descend to the earth, and from them vapors are raised that generate other waters; and in between there are frequently thunders, which are produced from the commotion of clouds generated by vapors and rains. Likewise it happens that after thunder, lightning follows. Ps. 135: "He made lightning for the rain." He says therefore, "The deep," that is, a multitude of waters, "calls to the deep," that is, draws to itself another multitude of waters; and this "at the voice of your cataracts," that is, there are certain hidden places in which waters are generated and from which they descend. Hence cataracts, that is, clouds, which are, as it were, certain cataracts from which they are generated. And in Scripture, the deep and the tempest signify evil. Ex. 15: "The deeps covered them." Hence "deep calls to deep"; as if to say: one punishment of God calls to another, that is, is followed by another; as if to say: the judgment of God by which he inflicts present evils calls to the judgment by which he inflicts future evils. Ps. 36: "Your judgments are a great deep." And this thus, "at the voice of your cataracts," that is, through the voice of your Scriptures, or of preachers. And this is referred to what he says, "My soul was disturbed." Why? Because "deep calls to deep": that is, from one evil or from one sin a great punishment follows. Or otherwise, "therefore I will be mindful," etc., so that by "deeps" is understood sacred doctrine; and thus the sense is: "the deep," that is, the Old Testament, calls to another, that is, the New Testament. And these two he brings together in harmony so that I may be mindful of you, because in both the help of God is promised to man; and this "at the voice of your cataracts," that is, of preachers and teachers. Or otherwise, "therefore I will be mindful," etc., because "deep calls to deep": that is, man, who is called a deep. "Who knows the things of a man except the spirit of the man that is in him?" 1 Cor. 2. Jer. 17: according to another reading, "The heart of man is deep and unsearchable." Therefore, "deep," that is, one man, calls another to Christ. And this happens not by one's own power, but "at the voice of your cataracts," that is, by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, from which the tongue of the preacher has its efficacy. "All your heights." Above, the Psalmist set forth a likeness of his tribulation; here, however, he explains the likeness itself. Above he said, "Deep calls to deep"; and this refers to signifying that he suffered not only one punishment, but many. And to this he follows his likeness: a man is afflicted by water, either descending from the air, or being in the air, or being below; and he says he is afflicted by both. By the first, when he says, "All your heights"; by the second, when he says, "And your waves have passed over me." These heights are future punishments, and they look toward the future judgment, which was in the sea, when they were submerged like lead, Ex. 15. The waves are the present punishments that call to that. And therefore, "I was troubled." Job 19: "They have made their way over me." The Gloss says, "They have passed over," that is, they have departed from me, "your waves." And thus according to this explanation, this is the reason for consolation; as if to say: I will be mindful of you, because all your heights and your waves have departed from me; as if to say: the greater punishments, which are designated by the waves, have passed over me, that is, they seemed to exceed my capacity. But the first explanation is better.

[87218] "In the day." As has been said, he stated two things: the disturbance in himself, etc., and confidence, at "Therefore I will be mindful of you." And he set forth the cause of the disturbance; now he explains the cause why he is mindful of God. And first he sets forth the experience of divine mercy; second he adds a prayer, at "With me is prayer." And he does two things, according to the twofold state of divine mercy, because the mercy of God is gentle in prosperity and in adversity. And therefore, as to prosperity, he says, "In the day the Lord commanded his mercy," that is, in the time of prosperity; as if to say: whatever prosperity I have, I attribute to divine mercy. Lam. 3: "The mercies of the Lord, that we are not consumed." As to the state of adversity he says, "And in the night he gave his song," that is, joy; that is, in tribulation there is the greatest consolation from divine mercy. Hence another reading has, "In the day he declared," that is, divine mercy is declared, that is, manifested in the time of adversity. Sir. 35: "The mercy of God is beautiful in the time of tribulation." Ps. 51: "According to the multitude of your mercies," etc. According to Jerome, however, it is read thus: "In the day the Lord commanded his mercy, and in the night his song is with me." "And this prayer to the Lord," etc.; as if to say: I perceive the mercy of God, etc., in the natural day, or of adversity; in the night the song of God; and I pray again to the God of my life. And this is the plainer reading. Yet according to how the Gloss explains it, let us explain and say, "With me is prayer," where he proposes the prayer. And concerning this he does three things. First he describes the manner of praying; second, the time of prayer; third, the effect of prayer. Concerning prayer he says two things: how he disposes himself for prayer, because sometimes a man prays and his prayer is not before God, when he does not pray by himself but so as to be seen in public. Mt. 6: "But you, when you pray," etc. Second, how he relates to the one to whom he prays, because "to the God of my life," namely the author of natural life. 1 Sam. 2: "The Lord kills and gives life." Likewise the life of grace. He is your life, because the soul lives by grace through this, that it lives for God. Likewise the life of glory. Ps. 36: "With you is the fountain of life." Next the prayer is set forth: "And I will say to God: You are my protector," etc. In which he does two things. First he gives thanks for benefits received; second he inquires about the reason for the evils he suffers. First a man ought to acknowledge, because one who is not grateful for benefits received is unworthy of those yet to be received. Wis. 16: "The hope of the ungrateful," etc. And therefore he says, "You are my protector." Jerome has, "You are my rock," that is, my strength. And therefore he is called protector, for defending. Ps. 3: "But you, O Lord, are my protector," etc. Or, "You are my protector," that is, of my nature. Is. 42: "Behold my servant, I will uphold him." Or, "my protector in Baptism." Ps. 18: "He took me from many waters." And if you are my protector, I wonder at the evils I suffer. And first he inquires about the reason for the evils; second he sets forth certain things that are signs of the one and the cause of the other, at "While the enemy afflicts." From the evils he considers two things. One on the part of God: namely, that he seems to have forgotten him. Another on his own part, because he is oppressed by sadness. On the part of God, because he permits him to be afflicted; and therefore he says, "Why have you forgotten me?" because formerly you upheld me thus. Is. 49: "The Lord has forgotten me." But in truth he has not forgotten; on the part of him who was being afflicted, he says, "And why do I go about in sadness," that is, what is the reason that you give me over to sadness? Ps. 38: "All the day I went about in sadness, while the enemy afflicts me." Here he shows the pain he suffers from adversaries, and he assigns the effect of the persecution; as if to say: this is the cause why I go about in sadness, because I am afflicted by enemies—sometimes by temporal ones, sometimes by spiritual ones. Mt. 13: "An enemy has done this." The cause of the sorrow or its effect is "while my bones are broken." The bones of the Church are the strong ones, such as prelates and perfect men. And sometimes through temporal adversaries, sometimes through temptations, they are afflicted. Ps. 22: "They have numbered all my bones." In every man, each virtue is like a certain bone; and if it happens that the just chaste man falls, his bone is broken. "They have reproached." Here he treats of the cause of the sadness he suffers from injurious words. Hence he says, "They have reproached me," namely with injurious words. Jer. 20: "I am made a derision all the day long; everyone mocks me." And this reproach is most grievous. A person bears a reproach more grievously when it is directed at him concerning a thing in which he has confidently gloried. Now this man most greatly gloried in God; and therefore this reproach is most grievous to him. And therefore, "My enemies say to me through each day: Where is your God?" Ps. 13: "Lest the enemy should say," etc. "Why are you sad?" etc. Here he shows the effect of prayer. And prayer has a twofold effect. One is the expulsion of sadness. The other is the increase of hope. The first effect is because through prayer the mind of man ascends to God; and because God is supremely good, when the soul clings to him it feels the greatest delight, and delight drives away or diminishes sadness. And therefore he says, "Why are you sad?" etc., since I have prayed. And this has been explained above. The other effect is that hope grows, because if a king admits someone to familiar service and conversation, he takes on confidence in asking and obtaining. In prayer, moreover, man speaks especially with God. Ps. 28: "In him my heart has hoped," etc. And therefore he adds, "Hope in God"; and this has been explained above.
