Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 31
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 31

[87077] Here begins the fourth decade of the first fifty. And just as in the first decade there are Psalms in which mention is made of the persecution by Absalom, in the second of the persecution by Saul, in the third of the persecution by the people, so in this fourth decade the tribulation that the good suffer from sinners is treated: 2 Pet. 2: "Dwelling among them, he tortured his righteous soul day after day with their lawless deeds." This decade is divided into two parts. First, the dignity of the just is commended. Second, help is implored against the persecutions of the impious, in Ps. 34: "Judge, O Lord, those who wrong me." Concerning the first, he recalls two things. First, justifying grace. Second, the dignity of the just, at Ps. 32: "Rejoice, you just," etc. Third, he admonishes the just to persist in justice, at Ps. 33: "I will bless the Lord." The title of this Psalm is new, namely: "Understanding of David." Jerome has, "Instruction of David." In many of the following Psalms this title is to be found. And it is signified by this that in all the Psalms in which this title is used, some common truth is treated, pertaining not only to one person but, as it were, to the providence of God or to something else that is lofty. And although in all Psalms certain things serve for instruction, these are nevertheless principally ordered to this purpose. Specifically, this Psalm is titled from the understanding that the penitent ought to have, who should understand that he is a sinner and recognize the grace of God that liberates: Lev. 5: "If a man shall understand his offense," etc. This understanding is given by affliction, Is. 28. "Blessed are those whose." This is the second of the Penitential Psalms. In the first he treated contrition of heart; in this one, confession. And it is divided into three parts. In the first, the remission of sins is set forth. In the second, the way to remission, at "Because I was silent," etc. Third, the desire of the saints for remission, at "For this shall every holy one pray." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth that which is on God's part. Second, that which is on man's part, at "Nor is there deceit in his spirit." For in sin there is, first, an offense against God; second, a stain; third, the liability to punishment. Against these three he directs three things: because God remits the offense, covers the stain, and removes the liability to punishment by not imputing the sin. As to the first, he says, "Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven," etc. But since blessedness is twofold, namely of reality and of hope, such persons, namely those whose iniquities are forgiven, are blessed in hope, and they will ultimately be blessed in reality. For that person is blessed in hope in whom the cause and the way to blessedness -- which is virtue, and especially perfect virtue -- is present. Hence in whomever perfect virtue appears, he can be called blessed in hope, just as a tree blossoming well can be called fruitful. But after the corruption of the first man, there were no such blossoms, but thorns of sins. And therefore the blessedness of the sinner that consists in hope is not of this kind, but rather that God should remit sin, and so the sinner bears fruit: Jer. 4: "Break up for yourselves new ground," etc. "Forgiven": Is. 40: "Her iniquity is pardoned": Lk. 6: "Forgive, and you shall be forgiven." As to the second, he says, "And whose sins are covered." Sins are stains of the soul: Jer. 2: "How vile you have become," etc. When someone has something shameful in himself and it is covered, then the shameful thing does not offend the eyes of the beholder. And God covers the shamefulness of sins. But how? Totally, namely by washing the soul. For in sin there is a twofold deformity. One, namely, from the privation of grace, of which the sinner is deprived; and this is totally removed, and is not merely covered, because grace is given to him. The other stain is from the past act of sin; and this is not erased, because it is not granted to him that he never committed it, but rather that it not be imputed to him as guilt; and this is covered. As to the third, he says, "Blessed is the man to whom the Lord has not imputed sin." This is understood of the liability to punishment, because punishment is not reserved for him on account of sin: Dan. 3: "You have brought all these things upon us," etc. According to the Gloss, a threefold sin is indicated here: original sin, actual mortal sin, and actual venial sin. The first is signified by "iniquity," which is a certain inequality; and this is in original sin, inasmuch as in it the powers of the soul recede from the equality of innocence. And this is remitted and diminished, because it is taken away as to guilt but remains as to act. He says "iniquities" in the plural, because in different persons there are different original sins, and in one person, one. The second is signified by actual mortal sin. For actual mortal sins are said to be covered when they are no longer imputed to the sinner as guilt. The third is signified by venial sin, which the Lord does not impute. For venial sin is not imputed to eternal punishment. Or, the first is said on account of sin before Baptism; the second on account of sins after Baptism; the third after confession, because sin will not be imputed to punishment. But on man's part, it is required that he confess without pretense; otherwise he does not obtain grace: Wis. 1: "The Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful." And therefore, "Nor is there deceit in his spirit," so that he has one thing interiorly and pretends another exteriorly.

[87078] "Because I was silent." This is the second part, where the way of arriving at the remission of sins is set forth. And concerning this he does three things. First, he sets forth the state of sin. Second, the conversion that is the cause of the remission of sin, at "I have made known my offense." He says therefore, "Because I was silent," etc. There seems to be a contradiction here. For while he cries out all day, he says he is silent. I respond: he was silent about what ought to have been said, but he was crying out what ought not to have been said, much less cried out. And in both there is sin. Concerning the first, Is. 6: "Woe to me, because I was silent." For the sinner ought to declare his sins: Job 16: "If I am silent, it does not depart from me; but now," etc. Therefore, "Because I was silent about my sins, my bones grew old," that is, my interior strength failed. Often in Sacred Scripture, interior virtues are understood through bodily members. Hence by "bones," in which there is strength, interior virtue is understood. And because what fails (that is, is diminished) grows old, he therefore says, "My bones grew old": Bar. 3: "What is it, O Israel, that you are in the land of your enemies? You have grown old," etc. Concerning the second, Is. 5: "I waited for him to do judgment, and behold, iniquity; justice, and behold, a cry." And this is what he says: "While I cried out all day long." For he was crying out that he was just, he was crying out about punishment, and he was silent about guilt. But what did the Lord do? He converted him by making the hand of the Lord heavy, inflicting a burden: "For day and night." Second, with the resulting conversion, "I was turned," etc. He says therefore, "Day and night," that is, continually, "your hand was heavy," etc. The hand of the Lord sometimes consoles: Ezek. 3: "The hand of the Lord was with me, strengthening me." Sometimes it makes heavy, as here: 1 Sam. 5: "The hand of the Lord was very heavy." Is. 26: "In tribulation," etc. And therefore he says, "I was turned in my wretchedness," that is, in the misery I suffer for my sins. "While the thorn is fixed" -- while the thorn, that is, the remorse of conscience, is driven into my heart. Or, [taking "spina"] as the backbone, which holds the whole person upright, "while it is fixed." And it signifies pride; when this is constrained, the person is corrected. Or, why were you crying out? On account of the heaviness, he says, of your hand. And this is because I was not turned to you, but to sin. And this while the thorn of sins is fixed, that is, is established in me; and so "thorn," that is, sin, is understood. Or while reason, which is like the spine directing the back, is pressed down. Or according to the Hebrews, "My moisture was turned into the dryness of summer," that is, from the pressing of your hand, whatever was carnal and moist in me was turned into the dryness of summer. Jerome has, "I was tossed about in my misery while the heat of harvest burns," that is, like the harvest, I dried up.

[87079] Then when he says "My offense." First, he sets forth the confession. Second, he shows its efficacy, at "I said, I will confess." But because a person ought to confess two things, namely, good things omitted and evil things committed, as to the first he says, "My offense," namely, that I omitted doing what I should have done, "I have made known to you" -- not that God does not know, but when a person acknowledges his sin, then he also wants God to know it, so that he may pardon it. As to the second, he says, "My injustice I have not hidden": Job 31: "If I have hidden my sin as a man," etc. Prov. 28: "He who hides his crimes," etc. The efficacy of confession is shown when he says, "I said, I will confess." The effect of confession is the remission of sins. He says therefore, "I said," that is, I purposed in my heart: "I will confess to the Lord," that is, for the honor of the Lord: Josh. 7: "Give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and confess," etc. "My injustice," not my good deeds; "against myself," not in my favor. Someone confesses his sin, but against his neighbor, saying, "Another led me into it." Against nature: "It happened from frailty." Against God: "I could not resist." 2 Sam. 24: "I am the one who sinned; I am the one who acted unjustly." Or "against myself," that is, against my own resolution, by which I had resolved to remain in sin. The remission follows: "And you forgave": Sir. 2: "He forgives sins in the time of tribulation." But against this: such is the efficacy of confession that not only when one actually confesses, but even while having the resolution to confess, one obtains remission. Therefore sin is remitted before one confesses: Is. 65: "And it shall be that before they cry out, I will hear." What then does confession accomplish? It must be said that the resolution to perform an action operates by virtue of the thing resolved upon, so that it may come to pass. Hence if the operation of that thing ceases, the effect ceases. And therefore it is necessary to persevere in the resolution. Nevertheless, in the actual confession of sins and in absolution by the power of the keys, part of the punishment is remitted, and on account of the shame involved, greater grace is conferred, and many good things follow.

[87080] Here, third, he sets forth the desire of the saints for the remission of sins. And concerning this he does three things. First, the desire of the saints for this is proposed. Second, the admonition of sinners: "Do not become like the horse." Third, the Psalm concludes with thanksgiving, at "Rejoice." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he expresses the desire of the saints for the remission of sins in general. Second, he shows his own refuge in particular, at "You are." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he proposes the desire of the saints through the sign of prayer. Second, he shows the effect of prayer, at "Nevertheless, in the flood." He says therefore: "I said, I will confess (...) for this matter," that is, for the remission of sins. And he says three things. First, what should be prayed for, namely, that we may obtain remission; for we have all sinned: 1 Jn. 1: "If we say that we have no sin," etc. And therefore remission should be sought: Sir. 38: "Pray to the Lord, and he will heal you": Mt. 6: "Forgive us our debts." Second, who should pray, namely "every holy one": Jas. 5: "The fervent prayer of a righteous person avails much." Third, when: "In a favorable time," namely, of grace and of the present life, because at the last the door is shut, Mt. 25; 2 Cor. 6: "Behold, now is the acceptable time," etc. Jn. 9: "Night comes, when no one can work."

[87081] Then when he says "Nevertheless," the effect of prayer is shown: because "in the flood of many waters." Water can here be taken in three ways. In one way, as pleasures: Gen. 49: "You were poured out like water." In another way, as false doctrines: Prov. 9: "Stolen waters are sweeter." Third, as tribulations: Ps. 68: "The waters have come in even to my soul." There follows, "They shall not draw near to him." What he says, "to him," can be understood in two ways. In one way, so that "him" refers to the holy one; as if to say: although the holy one prays, he nevertheless endures many waters, but they do not overwhelm him, whether they be waters of pleasure, or of false doctrine, or of tribulation. Hence, "They shall not draw near": Is. 43: "When you pass through the waters, I will be with you, and the rivers shall not cover you": Ps. 65: "We have passed through fire and water," etc. In another way, so that "him" refers to God; and thus he speaks with a change of person, because first he speaks to God, now to others. As if to say: those who are in the flood of many waters, as described above, shall not draw near to God.

[87082] Next, when he says "You are my refuge," etc., the desire of the saints is expressed in particular. And concerning this he does two things. First, he expresses the desire to be delivered. Second, the effect of that desire, at "I will give you understanding." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he shows whence he conceives the hope of praying. Second, he adds the petition: "Rescue me from those who surround me." He conceives the hope of petitioning from two things. First, because God is the special refuge of the just. Second, because he is their special refuge in tribulation. He therefore says, "You are my refuge from the tribulation that has surrounded me." Tribulation surrounds when it oppresses on every side, so that no refuge is available from any direction: Ps. 39: "Evils without number have surrounded me," etc. But in this tribulation there is no refuge except in God: 2 Chr. 20: "When we do not know what to do," etc. Ps. 90: "He who dwells in the help of the Most High," etc. So then, he says, I have one to whom I may flee; I also have one in whom I may find consolation, because "you are my exultation": 2 Cor. 1: "Who consoles us in all our tribulation": Ps. 93: "According to the multitude of my sorrows in my heart, your consolations have gladdened my soul." Then he expresses what he asks, when he says, "Rescue me from those who surround me," that is, from the tribulation that has surrounded me. And since tribulation must be caused by someone, it is necessary that if tribulation surrounds, those who press upon him are surrounding him, namely demons and persecutors. And therefore he says, "From those who surround me."

[87083] Second, when he says "I will give you understanding," he shows the effect of his prayer. It is God who speaks: "I will give you understanding," etc. As if God were saying: you ask me to rescue you, and I will do three things for you: I will give you the gift of understanding, I will instruct you, and I will guard you. For three things are necessary for a person from God. First, that he may receive the gift of grace, so that through it the person's soul may be perfected for acting promptly. But however much a person might have the gratuitous gift, unless God moves the soul to a good work, it does not suffice. Therefore it is necessary that after prevenient grace, God should work and move one toward good. But grace and the gift are received according to the mode of our nature, and not in such a way as to be able to avoid all things. And therefore the protection and defense of God is necessary beyond this. And so, first he sets forth the gift of understanding, when he says, "I will give you understanding": Sir. 15: "The Lord filled him with the spirit of wisdom and understanding." And this is necessary for a person, namely, that he may recognize his sin and that he cannot be saved except through God. Second, he sets forth the proper use of this gift, when he says, "I will instruct you": Is. 54: "I will make your children taught by the Lord." Third, guardianship, when he says, "In this way," namely of the commandments, "on which you will walk, I will fix my eyes upon you," that is, I will protect you: 2 Chr. 16: "The eyes of the Lord survey the whole earth and give strength to those who believe in him with a perfect heart."

[87084] Next, when he says "Do not become," he turns to sinners, that they may return to penance. And concerning this he does two things. First, he sets forth the admonition. Second, the threat, at "With bit." He says therefore: God gives a person understanding, and by understanding he surpasses animals. He who makes himself unworthy of the gift of understanding, therefore, is compared to animals. And so he says, "Do not become like the horse and the mule," etc. According to the Gloss, the horse is a proud animal; the mule, a sluggish animal, and therefore it does not run. Those, then, are like horses who are puffed up with pride: Jer. 8: "All of them have turned to their own course, like a horse charging impetuously into battle." Those are like the mule who come slowly to the way of God: Prov. 13: "The sluggard wants and does not want." Or by the mule the lustful are understood. The mule is lustful, yet it does not generate; so the sins of lust are fruitless: Rom. 6: "What fruit, then, did you have in those things, of which you are now ashamed?" Or, the horse carries any rider indifferently, and the mule bears any burden whatsoever. Two things are imposed on the sinner: a rider, namely the devil, and a burden, namely sin. Do not, therefore, be like the horse, which does not distinguish among riders -- whether it be Christ or the devil. Nor like the mule, which indifferently bears any burden, namely sin.

[87085] Then when he says "With bit," the threat is set forth. And first in the manner of a prayer. Second in the manner of a prediction, at "Many." He says therefore, "With bit," etc. Speaking metaphorically: if a person conducts himself as a person, God treats him as a person, with admonitions and teachings. But when he departs from the dignity of a person, he is treated like a brute animal, which is restrained by punishments and force, namely "with bit and bridle." As if to say: I have admonished them not to become like the horse and mule; but if they do not comply, do to them as to the horse and mule, namely "with bit and bridle constrain their jaws," that is, by suppressing their talkativeness and withdrawing the foods they use for gluttony. For both speech and taste are served by the jaw: Is. 37: "I will put a ring in your nostrils and a bridle," etc. Or "with bit and bridle," that is, with greater and lesser tribulation.

[87086] Second, when he says "Many," he predicts. And first, what is prepared for the wicked: because "many are the scourges" -- from God: Ps. 49: "I will rebuke you and set the matter before your face." From one's own conscience: Prov. 12: "One is pierced as by a sword of conscience." From authority: Rom. 13: "He is an avenger in wrath against the one who does evil": Prov. 26: "A whip for the horse, a muzzle for the donkey, and a rod for the back of fools." Second, what is prepared for the good. "The one who hopes," etc. "Mercy" can be in the nominative case, so that the meaning is that mercy itself will surround the one who hopes in the Lord. Or it can be in the ablative case, so that the meaning is that the Lord with his mercy will surround the one who hopes in him. And this is when he comes to the aid of human miseries on every side: Ps. 102: "Who crowns you with mercy," etc. Finally, the Psalm concludes with thanksgiving, when he says:

[87087] "Rejoice." Now it is the custom in the Penitential Psalms that they begin in weeping and end in joy, because this is what penance does. In this conclusion he exhorts the just and the upright to good action and right intention, saying, "Rejoice in the Lord and exult, you just." As if to say: two things are necessary for a person, namely, right action -- and this justice produces -- and right intention -- and this joy produces. He says therefore, "Rejoice, you just, and exult." According to the Gloss, to rejoice is to be glad with a quiet sweetness; to exult is to be glad with the fervor of an animated spirit. Hence exultation arises from interior joy. But in what? "In the Lord," he says, not in the world: Phil. 4: "Rejoice in the Lord; again I say, rejoice." There follows, "And glory, all you who are upright of heart." The upright of heart are those who conform their will to the divine will; these have cause to glory in God: 2 Cor. 10: "Let the one who glories, glory in the Lord."
