Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 50
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 50

[87282] In the preceding Psalms of this decade, the Psalmist seems to have treated of those things that pertain to the state of the kingdom, whose glory he described and to which he invited others. But now, because the glory of this kingdom has been impeded by sin, he treats of the abolition of sin. Here two things must be considered. First, that in the order of the Psalms, this Psalm is the fiftieth, and this is the jubilee number, as is said in Lev. 27, in which the remission of all debts was made. Hence this number is fitting for this Psalm, in which he treats of the full remission of sins. Similarly, as regards the penitential Psalms, this one is placed fourth, and fittingly so: for the first pertains to contrition of heart; hence it says, Ps. 6: "Every night I will wash," etc. The second pertains to confession of mouth, Ps. 31: "I said, I will confess," etc. The third pertains to satisfaction; hence it says, Ps. 37: "I am afflicted," etc. But this fourth pertains to the effect of penance. In it is shown how penance restores a person to perfection; and therefore, among all the others, this Psalm is most frequently used in the Church, because this one solely implores mercy, and thus obtains pardon; and this is easy and can be fitting for anyone. In the other six penitential Psalms, there are certain heavy things, such as Ps. 6: "Every night I will wash my bed." And Ps. 101: "I ate ashes like bread," etc., which cannot be fitting for everyone. The title is as follows: "A Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came to him after he had gone in to Bathsheba." This history is expressly found in 2 Sam. 11 and 12, when David was in prosperity, saw a woman washing herself, and desired her, and committed adultery, and had her husband killed. And this displeased God, and Nathan the prophet was sent to him and brought him to the detestation of his sin under the likeness of a lost sheep. And David said, "I have sinned against the Lord." And his sin was forgiven. And this is the subject matter of this Psalm, namely the forgiveness of sin. But it should be known regarding the title of this Psalm that David in other Psalms speaks about others -- as in Ps. 21, "O God, my God," he speaks foretelling the Passion of Christ; and so in various Psalms he speaks about various things -- but this Psalm he composed for his own sake. In it he shows the guilt he committed, made manifest to the world, and similarly the pardon; and thus is fulfilled what the Lord said, 2 Sam. 12: "You did this in secret, and I will make it manifest." The reason for this manifestation is the divine mercy; for this manifestation is useful to the just, so that they may not presume on their own justice, because if David, after so many victories, after the gift of the Holy Spirit, after such great familiarity with God and prophecy, sinned, how much more should we, who are fragile and sinners, be on guard? 1 Cor. 10: "Let him who thinks he stands take heed lest he fall." Also, it is useful to sinners, so that they may not despair. Prov. 24: "If you despair, having fallen, in the day of anguish your strength will be diminished"; for David, after homicide and adultery, recovered the grace of prophecy. The manner of speaking in the title should be noted: "when he came" -- here he designates the pardon, which is treated in the Psalm, because through Nathan the Lord heard him and transferred his sin. But when it says, "when he went in to Bathsheba," the guilt is designated. Here two things are shown. First, that he names the guilt when he says, "and he went in." Ps. 11: "The words of the Lord are chaste words." Also, though he had committed two sins, namely adultery and homicide, Scripture named only the adultery. And this for two reasons. First, to designate that in scrutinizing and publicizing the sins of others, we should not be ready but very sparing. Prov. 24: "Do not lie in wait to seek wickedness in the house of the just"; and this is signified in Mt. 25, where the Lord enumerates the merits of the good diligently but passes over the demerits of the wicked. Also, it should be noted that when someone commits two sins and one is done for the sake of the other, one passes into the species of the other; just as one who commits theft in order to fornicate is called a fornicator rather than a thief. Now this Psalm is divided into two parts. First, he implores mercy; second, he promises amendment, at "I will teach the unjust." Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he asks for the relaxation of guilt; second, he asks for the restoration of holiness and grace, at "because my iniquity." He therefore first asks for the mercy of God, when he says, "Have mercy on me, O God." Here it should be known that, as is said in Prov. 14, "Sin makes peoples wretched." For just as one is not truly happy who abounds in riches, enjoys pleasures, and excels in honors, but rather one who enjoys God, so one is not wretched who is poor, miserable, weak, and infirm, but rather one who is a sinner. And therefore this man, who is a sinner, says, "Have mercy on me, O God," you who have mercy on all and hate nothing of what you have made, Wis. 11. And according to the apostle, "have mercy on whom you will," Rom. 9: "I will have mercy on whom I will." Therefore, if it is subject to your will to have mercy, "have mercy on me," namely a sinner. He does not wish to contend, he does not seek to argue, but takes the short way: "have mercy." Also, he does not allege a cause for mercy, not the services he rendered to God, not the dangers he endured for him, but implores only the mercy of God; hence he says, "according to your great mercy." Dan. 9: "Not in our justifications do we prostrate our prayers before your face, but in your many mercies." And it should be noted that one can hope for divine mercy for a double reason. One reason is from the consideration of the divine nature; the other reason is from the consideration of the multitude of its effects. First, therefore, he shows that he hopes for the mercy of God from the consideration of the divine nature, because it is proper to the divine nature that it is goodness itself. Hence Dionysius says that God is the very substance of goodness. And Boethius in his work On the Trinity says the same. Hence this mercy of God is nothing other than goodness directed toward dispelling wretchedness. Therefore, when I consider that it is proper to goodness to dispel wretchedness, and that God is goodness itself, I confidently have recourse to mercy. And it is called great in its incomprehensibility, by which it fills all things. Ps. 32: "The earth is full of the mercy of the Lord." And it has a place in all things: for the just have preserved their innocence on account of the mercy of God. Augustine: "Lord, I attribute to your grace the evils I have not committed." Also, sinners have been converted to justice on account of the mercy of God. 1 Tim. 1: "I have obtained mercy." Also, those existing in sin have experienced the mercy of God. Lam. 3: "The mercies of the Lord are many; for we are not consumed." Also, it is called great in its sublimity, because "his mercies are above all his works"; for mercy does not signify in God a passion of the soul, but goodness directed toward dispelling wretchedness. Also great in its duration. Is. 54: "With everlasting mercy I have had compassion on you." Also great in its power, because it made God become man, brought God from heaven to earth, and made the immortal one die. Eph. 2: "But God, who is rich in mercy." Also great in its effect, because from every wretchedness a person can be raised through mercy. Ps. 85: "Your mercy is great upon me, and you have forgiven the wickedness of my sin" (Ps. 31). And therefore I confidently ask: "Have mercy on me, O God." The other reason is that in all things from the beginning of the world I have found the effects of your mercy. And therefore he says, "and according to the multitude of your mercies, blot out my iniquity"; as if to say: have mercy on me, according as you have had mercy in many ways and on diverse people. Hence Is. 63 says: "I will be mindful of the mercies of the Lord." Ps. 24: "Remember your mercies," etc. "Blot out my iniquity." Here he sets forth the effect of having mercy. Nathan said, 2 Sam. 12: "The Lord has taken away your sin," etc. And so he was secure about pardon; but he wished the sin to be totally eradicated. Now a twofold effect of sin remains: namely, the debt of punishment and the stain on the soul. First, therefore, he asks for the removal of the debt of punishment; and therefore, "wash me yet more from my iniquity." It should be known that in Jer. 17 it is said that the sin of Judah was written with an iron pen, with a point of diamond; in the likeness of a judge who writes the offense, which is preserved written for as long as he has the intention of punishing; but if he puts aside this intention, he does not preserve the record. And so it is said to be written with a diamond pen when the sin is not blotted out. And this is what he says, "blot out my iniquity," that is, do not impute my iniquity to me for punishment. Is. 43: "I am he who blots out your iniquities." Also, ibid. 44: "I have blotted out your iniquities like a cloud, and your sins like a mist." "Wash me yet more." Here he asks for the removal of the uncleanness of guilt. A person who has a well-disposed mind abhors the uncleanness of guilt more than the severity of punishment; and therefore he says, "wash me yet more"; as if to say: I ask that you blot out the punishment; but more than that, I ask that you cleanse the stain. Or, "wash me more" than I understand. Rom. 8: "For we do not know what we should pray for as we ought." Eph. 3: "He who is able to do all things more abundantly than we ask or understand." Two things are necessary for removing the stain: namely, a preceding washing and a following cleanliness. In bodies, washing is done through water; and so, according to the Gloss, through water the Psalm prefigures the power of Baptism, by which God was going to forgive sin. Ezek. 36: "I will pour upon you clean water," etc. Zech. 13: "There shall be a fountain open to the house of David for the washing of the sinner and of the unclean woman." And although Baptism had not yet been instituted, nevertheless the power of God that washes was present in Baptism. Therefore, "wash me from my iniquity." Jer. 4: "Wash your heart from wickedness, O Jerusalem, that you may be saved." I also ask that "you cleanse me from my sin," because no one is cleansed except by you. Job 14: "Who can make clean that which is conceived of unclean seed?" Sir. 34: "Who shall be cleansed by the unclean?" And he says two things: namely, "iniquity" and "sin." Iniquity is contrary to justice; but sin is contrary to purity; and this is the adultery. And so there was iniquity insofar as he harmed another through homicide; but sin was through the adultery by which he defiled himself.

[87283] "Because." Here he confesses his guilt. And first, he confesses the guilt. Second, he shows this confession to be acceptable to God. First, therefore, he confesses the guilt. Second, he aggravates the guilt, at "against you alone have I sinned." Third, he demonstrates its origin, at "behold indeed." He therefore recognizes his guilt, saying, "because my iniquity." Some do not recognize their sins for three reasons: because reason is weighed down by the gravity of sin. Prov. 18: "When the wicked man comes to the depth of sins, he scorns." Ps. 39: "My iniquities have overtaken me, and I was not able to see." Also, because they do not remember. Eccl. 5: "He has forgotten his delights." Also, because of the flattery of men. Ps. 9: "The sinner is praised in the desires of his soul." And therefore, because others praise him for his sins, he himself does not recognize them. But happy is he who recognizes his sin, as David did. Prov. 14: "The heart knows the bitterness of its soul; in its joy no stranger shall intermeddle." As to the second, he says, "and my sin is always before me." Some are those who, even if they recognize their sin, nevertheless do not detest it; but this man always has his sin before him as something contrary, harmful, and detestable. And he says "always." Some are those who detest sin for a time. Jas. 1: "He beheld himself and went away," etc. Is. 38: "I will recount to you all my years," etc. "My iniquity I know." Another text: "before me"; and thus it designates that he recognizes his guilt and that he continually meditates upon it. And this was established before God through Nathan the prophet, under the likeness. "Against you alone have I sinned." Above, the Psalmist set forth the recognition of his own guilt; here he aggravates his guilt; and regarding this he does two things. First, he aggravates it. Second, he sets forth what follows from the aggravation, at "that you may be justified." He aggravates this guilt by comparison to God; and in two ways, as is said in Jer. 29: "I will be judge and witness." For he seems to despise God as judge who does not fear to sin because of his judgment. And similarly he despises God as witness who sins in his sight; and therefore he says, "against you alone have I sinned." But did he not sin against Uriah, whom he killed? Yes. But he says, "against you alone," that is, against God, because he is not answerable to his servant, but to the sentence of God. For when a lord who is over his servant sins, he does not sin against the servant but against God. Wis. 6: "Power has been given to you by the Lord, and strength by the Most High, who will examine your works and search your thoughts." Or, "against you alone," that is, in comparison to you alone have I sinned. And this can be referred either to God or to Christ. He is said to sin against God in comparison with the just; and so, "against you alone have I sinned," because you alone are without sin. And similarly, Christ was altogether without sin. "Against you, therefore, alone have I sinned," by contemning your judgment. Also, I despised you as witness, because "I have done evil before you," in your sight and presence. Prov. 15: "Hell and perdition are before the Lord; how much more the hearts of the children of men." Sir. 23: "The eyes of the Lord are far brighter than the sun." "That you may be justified." Here is set forth what follows from this aggravation; and this can be read in many ways. But first I will say what seems most fitting. For the word "that" is sometimes used causally, sometimes merely consecutively; and then the sense is: "I have done evil before you," so "that you may be justified," not because anyone is justified on account of sin, but this follows from sin, because from the very fact that a person sins, the justice of God is made more manifest; for from his sins it became apparent that God punished him. This punishment consists in two things. First, he threatens. Second, he inflicts punishment; and in both he is just. As to the first, he says, "in your words," by which you threaten punishment. Prov. 8: "My words are just." As to the second, he says, "and you may prevail when you are judged," that is, when you are compared with others in judgment. Often God, to show his justice and ours as well, wishes to be judged with us. Is. 5: "Judge between me and my vineyard." And in this God is found more just. Job 9: "If he wished to contend with God, he could not answer him one in a thousand." And that this is the intention of the Psalm is clear from the Apostle, Rom. 3: "But God is true, and every man a liar, as it is written." But in the Gloss, he speaks so that what is said, "that you may be justified in your words," etc., is not connected with "I have done evil before you," etc., but with what he says, "against you alone," that is, in comparison with you, who alone are just, and so much so that all your words are just. And thus "that" is placed causally; as if to say: you are so just "that you are justified." Or if it is referred to Christ, the sense is: "against you alone," namely Christ, "have I sinned," because you are just, "and you prevail" over all men "when you are judged," even though you are judged by Pilate. Or otherwise: "that you may be justified" -- in this I further ask that you wash me, for this purpose, "that you may be justified," that is, that your promises may be perfectly true, namely concerning Christ who was to be born, to whom it was promised, Ps. 131: "Of the fruit of your womb," etc., and that sin would be remitted. 2 Sam. 12: "The Lord has taken away your sin," etc. "You prevail when you are judged" by men who say that you ought not to fulfill your promises and ought not to blot out my sins.

[87284] "Behold indeed." Here he sets forth the root of the guilt. The root of all actual guilt is original sin, which is contracted from parents infected with that sin; this infection was in the father of David and in his mother. As to the father, he says, "in iniquities I was conceived" -- not actual iniquities, because he was not born of adultery, but of marriage and from holy Jesse, as is said in the last chapter of Ruth -- but in original sin; for in this sin all are born. Rom. 5: "Through one man sin entered into this world." But since original sin is one, why does he say "in iniquities," etc.? It must be said that original sin is one in essence, so to speak, but many in power, because it provides the occasion for all other sins. Rom. 7: "Sin which is in my flesh works." And this diminishes the guilt; as if to say: it is not surprising that I sin, because I was conceived in these things. As to the mother, he says, "and in sins did my mother conceive me." But were not the parents of David cleansed from original sin through circumcision? It must be said that Baptism and circumcision cleanse the soul from the guilt of original sin, but the tinder of sin still remains, and circumcision was performed on the flesh, and a person begets carnal children according to the flesh; and therefore it was necessary that the son born be circumcised again. So now one born of baptized parents is baptized. Another text has, "my mother nourished me." And this is referred to actual sins, because even in children disordered movements are found, as Augustine says in Confessions 6. Another text has, "she bore me," etc. And so, because some are sanctified in the womb, but all except Christ are conceived in original sin, he says that he was not sanctified in the womb but born in original sin. "Behold, you have loved truth." He who wishes to make satisfaction must love the things that God loves. But God loves the truth of faith. Jn. 18: "Everyone who is of the truth hears my voice." Also, justice. Ps. 88: "Mercy and truth shall go before your face." And this is necessary in the penitent, that he punish in himself what he has done wrong. Also, confession is necessary, that he confess his sins.

[87285] "The uncertain things." Here he asks for total restoration. And first, he sets forth the hope he has. Second, his petition. And first, he sets forth the benefit received, through which he is raised to hope. Second, he sets forth his confidence, at "you shall sprinkle me." He commemorated the benefit of power when he said, "the uncertain and hidden things," because as king he had the benefit of prophecy. 2 Sam. 23: "The Spirit of the Lord spoke through me, and his word through my tongue." And he sets forth three things: namely, the matter of prophecy, its mode, and its cause. He shows the matter of prophecy when he says, "the uncertain and hidden things." Prophecy concerns these things, namely, uncertain and hidden things, which are comprehended by your wisdom. In us, something is unknown in two ways, yet known to God: either because of a defect, or because of an excess. Something future and contingent is unknown to us because of a defect, because it does not yet have a determined truth. Something is unknown to us because of an excess, namely the divine substance and things that exceed our capacity. Both were revealed to David through the spirit of prophecy. Amos 3: "The Lord God will not do a thing unless he has revealed his secret to his servants the prophets." "The uncertain things, therefore, you have manifested to me," that is, those things which by their very nature have variability; and these were revealed to him, as is clear in the Psalm. "Hidden things" are called those which exceed the eye of our mind. Job 28: "Wisdom is drawn from hidden things." Sir. 24: "I am in the highest places," etc.; and these are the things of the wisdom of God; as if to say: although they are hidden to us, nevertheless they are comprehended by your wisdom. And among the hidden things he commemorates the mystery of the Incarnation, which you also manifested to me. Also, the mercy of God is numbered among these, because it remits sins. But it is better to take it universally. The mode of revelation is set forth when he says, "you have manifested to me." There is a threefold mode of prophecy. One, in which a supernatural and intelligible truth is revealed under corporeal likenesses and images; and so Is. 6 says: "I saw the Lord sitting," etc. Another is that in which the revelation of a supernatural and intelligible truth is made without the cloud of imaginative fantasy; indeed, it is not yet revealed; and so the revelation was made to Moses, Num. 12: "Plainly and not through enigmas and figures he saw God." And such also was the revelation to David. 2 Sam. 23: "The God of Israel spoke to me." And below: "As the light of the dawn remains when the sun rises without clouds, it shines." "You shall sprinkle me with hyssop." Above, the Psalmist commemorated the benefit of God granted to him as to the grace of prophecy, from which he was raised to hope; here he shows what he hoped for from God. And there were two things. First, he hopes for the removal of the evils he had incurred through sin. Second, he hopes for the restoration of the goods he had lost, at "to my hearing." It should be known that through sin a person first incurs uncleanness. Jer. 2: "You are stained in your iniquity." Second, he incurs disfigurement; hence Lam. 4: "Their face has been made blacker than coals." And he hopes that both of these will be removed from him: namely, spiritual uncleanness and disfigurement. Uncleanness occurs because the affection of a person clings to temporal things and becomes like them; hence if it is joined to baser things, like gold to lead, it becomes base. Hos. 9: "They became abominable like the things they loved." But disfigurement occurs because, by clinging to earthly things, the light of reason in him is obscured, because he is compared to brute animals. Ps. 48: "Man, when he was in honor," etc. And therefore the soul becomes black or obscure. And therefore, as to the first, he says, "You shall sprinkle me with hyssop," where he alludes to the rite of the Old Testament, Num. 19, where on the third day the unclean person was sprinkled with the water of purification, and on the seventh day he was washed with water, and his garments were also washed. The water of purification was made with hyssop. And therefore he says, "You shall sprinkle me with hyssop." And that water was made from the ash of a red heifer, through which Christ was prefigured. Hence by that sprinkling which he asks for, the sprinkling of the blood of Christ is signified. 1 Pet. 1: "In the sprinkling of the blood of Christ." Heb. 12: "You have come to the mountain... and to the sprinkling of blood that speaks better than Abel." This was done with hyssop. Hyssop is a plant that clings to the earth and cures swelling, as the Gloss says; and it corresponds to faith, which has humility, because through faith the intellect is subjected to God. 2 Cor. 10: "Bringing every understanding into captivity to the obedience of Christ." Also, it is rooted in the rock, that is, Christ. Mt. 16: "Upon this rock," etc. "And the rock was Christ," 1 Cor. 10. Also, it dispels the inflation of the human spirit, which is in those who do not obey the faith of Christ. 1 Tim. 6: "If anyone teaches differently and does not acquiesce in the sound words of our Lord Jesus Christ, he is not of his" (Rom. 8). He says therefore: Lord, I have firm hope that you will sprinkle me with the water of purification. Ezek. 36: "I will pour upon you water," etc. "You shall wash me": for after faith, Baptism is necessary. Zech. 13: "There shall be a fountain open to the house of Jacob," etc. Is. 1: "Wash yourselves, be clean." The effect of this washing: "I shall be made whiter than snow," because the blackness will be removed; and this, because the soul will be whiter than snow. Is. 1: "If your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow." And he says "whiter than snow," because the whiteness of the sanctified soul exceeds all bodily beauty, as is clear in Mt. 17, in the Transfiguration of Christ, whose garments were made white as snow. All the just pertain to the garments of Christ. Is. 49: "You shall be clothed with all of these as with a garment." And through this he designates himself as pertaining to the garment of Christ through Baptism: "As many as have been baptized have put on Christ," says the apostle in Gal. 3.

[87286] "To my hearing." Here he sets forth how he has hope for the recovery of the goods which he had lost; and there are two: namely, the gift of prophecy and the joy of conscience. The gift of prophecy is compared to hearing, because the prophet does not see the essence of God so as to see revealed things in it, but certain signs of the revealed truth are made in the soul of the prophet, and these signs function in the manner of speech, etc. 1 Sam. 3: "Speak, Lord, for your servant is listening." Is. 21: "What I have heard from the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have announced to you." This hearing had been interrupted for him through sin, and he hoped to recover it; and therefore he says, "To my hearing you shall give," etc. Or, "to my hearing" by which I heard from Nathan that my sin was taken away, whereby I conceived joy. But as to the joy of conscience, it should be known that spiritual joy has three degrees. First, it exists in the delight of the affection; second, in the expansion of the heart; third, in its outward progression. Delight is designated by "joy" when he says, "To my hearing," etc., namely, from the fact that I shall hear what you speak, or what Nathan has spoken. Phil. 4: "Rejoice in the Lord," etc. But when the affection rests in the beloved thing, then the mind expands to receive more of this expansion; and this also appears in sensible things. 2 Cor. 6: "Our heart is enlarged"; and therefore he says, "gladness," which here signifies expansion as a kind of gladness. But further, gladness also overflows to the body. Prov. 17: "A joyful mind makes for a flourishing age; a sorrowful spirit dries up the bones." And so, in the vision of glory in the homeland, after the resurrection, from the joy of the mind the body shall be glorified. Is. 66: "You shall see, and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall sprout like grass." And so he himself says, "the humbled bones shall exult"; and this for present glorification, for through the sorrow of penance the heart of a person is crushed; and therefore when people are joyful, it is a sign that the bones which have been crushed and afflicted participate in the joy. Prov. 12: "Sorrow in the heart of a man shall bring him low." Is. 58: "He will fill your soul with brightness, and will deliver your bones." Or, "the bones shall exult," that is, the spiritual virtues, which are increased through spiritual joy. And because through this joy the just person is strengthened.

[87287] "Turn away." Here he asks for the recovery of innocence. And because he considers that the evil of guilt is in him and the good of grace, he first asks for the removal of evil or sin; second, he asks for the removal of the effect of sin, at "Create in me a clean heart, O God." For sin is removed not in the sense that the sin never existed, but in the sense that the committed sin is not imputed to him for punishment, according to Ps. 31: "Blessed is the man to whom the Lord has not imputed sin." And he speaks in the likeness of a judge who punishes, who first considers the magnitude of the guilt and then determines the punishment; therefore he asks that God not consider his sin but be unmindful of it; and therefore he says, "Turn away your face from my sins." Second, he asks that punishment not be inflicted; hence he says, "and blot out all my iniquities"; as if to say: I know that I have done evil before you, and therefore I ask that you turn away your face from my sins, that is, that you not consider my sins for punishment. Ezek. 18: "I will not remember all his iniquities." Also, I merited the punishment of damnation; but I ask that you blot it out, because God, even if he does not change his counsel, nevertheless changes the sentence. "A clean heart." Above, the Psalmist asked for sin to be removed; here he asks for the effects of sin to be removed, which are two: namely, the defilement of the soul and the disorder of the affections. The first effect occurs because a person is attached to earthly things; hence he asks for cleanness of heart. Mt. 5: "Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God"; and therefore he says, "Create in me a clean heart, O God, and a right spirit." This cleanness of heart, God alone can restore. Job 14: "Who can make clean one conceived of unclean seed? Is it not you who alone are," namely, simply clean? And he says "create." Something is created unto the being of nature when it is produced from nothing into being. Gen. 1: "In the beginning God created," etc. Also when it is produced unto the being of grace. 1 Cor. 13: "If I should have prophecy, and should know all mysteries, etc., I am nothing" in the being of grace. But when God works by the operation of grace in one who has grace, he is said to magnify him. But when he makes a just person out of a sinner, then he is properly said to create. Eph. 2: "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus in good works." Jas. 1: "That we might be some beginning of his creature," namely, his spiritual creature. The second thing that follows from sin is the disorder of the mind, which occurs through the turning away from the proper end. Therefore, just as through the turning to some changeable good the mind becomes unclean, so through the turning away from the end it becomes disordered; and the rectitude by which a person is directed toward God is opposed to this disorder. Song 1: "The upright love you"; and therefore he says, "and renew a right spirit," that is, grant anew, because I lost it through sin. Eph. 4: "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind." "And renew it" not outwardly, but "in my inward parts," so that not only my lips for speaking but my heart may be right for knowing. "Do not cast me from your face, and do not take your Holy Spirit from me." Here he asks for the restoration of grace. And first, he asks for grace itself. Second, he asks for the effect of grace, at "restore." A person is said to have the grace of God in two ways: for someone is said to have the grace of God and of man; and as to something, similarly, namely when he is pleasing to both, namely to God and to man. And this is called sanctifying grace. Eph. 1: "In which he has made us acceptable in his beloved Son." And accordingly, grace is called the benevolence of God, by which God loves a person unto eternal life. And as to something, it is dissimilar: for the grace of man does not make him good, but from his own goodness he becomes pleasing to man; but with God it is the reverse, because from the benevolence of God it follows that a person becomes good. There are therefore two things in the grace of God: namely, the benevolence itself and its effect in the soul; and he asks for both when he says, "Do not cast me away," etc. And this can be understood in two ways. He who is in the face of someone is seen by him and can see him. This person is said to be in the face of God, according to 1 Kgs. 17: "As the Lord lives, in whose holy sight I stand." Gen. 48: "The God in whose sight my fathers walked." And this, because they themselves are upright for seeing God. Ps. 26: "One thing I have asked of the Lord," etc. Through sin, both are lost, because sinners desert God, are deserted by God, and lose the confidence of trusting in God. Is. 59: "Your sins and iniquities have divided between you and your God," etc., as to the first; "and your sins have hidden his face from you," as to the second. This person, therefore, is cast from the face of God through sin; and therefore he asks that he not be finally cast away in either way. Also note that in a person there are two things: namely, guilt, from which he is worthy of punishment, and nature, from which he has a fitness for grace; and therefore he asks that God not look upon the guilt but upon the nature; and therefore he says, "Do not cast me away." Also, the gift of grace is given through charity; and such a gift is given through the Holy Spirit; and therefore he says, "and do not take your Holy Spirit from me," whose temple I had been, but I lost it because of sin. Wis. 1: "The Holy Spirit of discipline will flee from the deceitful." Therefore, "do not take away," namely finally. "Restore to me": for grace does two things in a person. One is in respect to higher things, namely, it gives delight, because he who has grace has charity, and he who has charity loves God and possesses him; and he who possesses what he loves rejoices. Therefore, where there is charity, there is joy. Rom. 14: "The kingdom of God is not food and drink, but joy in the Holy Spirit." The Psalmist had lost this joy; and therefore he asks for it to be restored to him when he says, "Restore to me the joy" -- not of worldly things, but "of your salvation," that is, of your saving act. Another text has, "the joy of Jesus," namely of the Savior, through whom the remission of sins is accomplished. Hab. 3: "I will exult in God my Jesus." The other effect is in respect to lower things; and this effect is confirmation in grace, which is accomplished through the Holy Spirit: "and confirm me with a sovereign spirit." The Holy Spirit strengthens in two ways: in one way, against evils. Is. 8: "With a strong hand he instructed me." In another way, in good. Is. 40: "Those who hope in the Lord shall renew their strength." This strength is had through the Holy Spirit; for the body is not firm for enduring or for acting except through the strength of spirits; so also a person is not strong without the Holy Spirit. But he would not provide strength unless he were a sovereign spirit; because an inferior power is not sufficient to provide aid against a superior one. But the power of the Devil is great. Job 41: "There is no power on earth that can be compared to him." Therefore, against the Devil, a person needs to be aided by a sovereign spirit, namely one that is princely and has dominion over all things. And a person needs this spirit against the spirit of the flesh. Num. 16: "Most mighty God, God of the spirits of all flesh." Also, against the spirit of the world. 1 Cor. 2: "But we have not received the spirit of this world, but the Spirit who is from God." Also, against the spirit of the Devil. 1 Sam. 18: "An evil spirit of the Lord came upon Saul." It should be noted that in this reading there is a threefold mention of "spirit": for there is mentioned a right spirit, a holy spirit, and a sovereign spirit. And according to the Gloss, some take "spirit" as said essentially, insofar as everything that is not a body is a spirit. Hence the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit are called spirit. But it is better to take it personally. Now the Holy Spirit does three things in a person. First, rectitude of intention. Ps. 142: "Your good spirit," etc. Also, he sanctifies us. Rom. 1: "According to the spirit of sanctification." Also, he ennobles us and makes us princes. Gal. 4: "Because you are sons of God, God has sent the Spirit of his Son into your hearts."

[87288] "I will teach." Above, the Psalmist set forth his petitions to God; here he promises recompense. And first, he promises what he will do for God in the present. Second, in the future, at "deal favorably." Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he promises God certain spiritual sacrifices. Second, he excuses himself from the offering of carnal sacrifices, at "for if you had desired sacrifice." He promises God a twofold spiritual sacrifice: namely, of teaching, through which the neighbor is instructed. Second, he promises the spiritual sacrifice of praise, through which God is praised, at "deliver me." He says therefore, "I will teach the unjust your ways." And it should be noted that above, in another Psalm (49), it was said, "But to the sinner God said: Why?" etc., through which he shows that it does not befit a sinner to pour forth teaching. And therefore, as long as he felt himself to be a sinner, he did not promise to manifest teaching; but after God restored to him the sovereign spirit, and such as these it befits to have teaching and to teach others. Jer. 3: "I will give you a shepherd after my own heart, who will feed you with knowledge and doctrine." And of Christ it is said in Acts 1: "Jesus began to do and (afterward) to teach." Now the fruit of this teaching is not merely the speculation of truth for the purpose of blessed contemplation, but its intended end is the conversion of sinners; and therefore he says, "and the wicked shall be converted to you." Jer. 15: "They shall be converted to you, and you shall not be converted to them." Ps. 21: "All the nations shall be converted to the Lord." And according to the Gloss, he calls the wicked and the unjust the same; although David understands that the unjust are those who sin against God; and therefore he pointedly says, "I will teach the unjust"; as if to say: some, even if they revere God, nevertheless act against their neighbor and unjustly; and these I will teach your ways, namely, so that they may not offend their neighbor. 1 Jn. 4: "We have a commandment from God, that he who loves God should love his brother also." "Deliver me from bloodguilt." Here he promises the sacrifice of praise; and there are two impediments to this sacrifice. One is the guilt of sin; the other is an interior defect. First, therefore, he asks for the removal of the first impediment. Second, he asks for the removal of the second, at "O Lord, you shall open my lips." He therefore asks for the removal of the impediment and promises the sacrifice of praise. The impediment to divine praise, as has been said, is the guilt of sin. Sir. 15: "Praise is not seemly," etc. Now David was guilty of grave sin; and therefore he asks to be freed from it; and therefore he says, "Deliver me from bloodguilt." According to the Gloss, this noun "blood" is not declined in the plural number; nevertheless, the translator wished to use it to express the sin. And this refers to the concupiscence of the flesh, which is flesh and blood. Mt. 16: "Flesh and blood has not revealed this to you," etc.; as if to say: deliver me from sins committed through flesh and blood. Or it must be said that David had committed the sin of adultery and homicide; and in both there is blood, because in homicide blood is shed. Ps. 5: "The man of blood and deceit," etc. But adultery proceeds from the fervor of blood; and therefore he says, "from bloodguilt." Hos. 4: "Blood has touched blood." O God, deliver me therefore from bloodguilt, because you alone can. Is. 43: "I am he who blots out your iniquities for my own sake," etc. "And because you are the God of my salvation," that is, who can save me. "And my tongue shall exult," namely with delight and with interior joy of heart, "I will declare your justice." Is. 30: "You shall have a canticle as in the night of a sanctified solemnity." Also, ibid. 35: "They shall come to Zion with praise, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads." Ps. 41: "With the voice of exultation," etc. "O Lord, you shall open my lips." It should be known that sometimes a person is impeded from teaching even by an interior impediment to speaking; and this happens sometimes because of the fault of the hearers. Ezek. 3: "I will make your tongue cleave to your palate, and you shall be mute." And below: "Because the house is exasperating." And because of his own sin. Ps. 106: "All iniquity shall stop its mouth." Because therefore God alone made the tongues of infants eloquent, Wis. 10, he therefore asks: Lord, remove the impediments which I have incurred through sin from my lips. And you, "open my lips." Eph. 6: "That speech may be given me in the opening of my mouth, to make known with confidence the mystery of the Gospel." It should be noted that in the opening of the mouth, the depth of teaching is understood wherever it is found in the Scriptures, as Job 3: "After this, Job opened his mouth." And Mt. 5: "Jesus, opening his mouth," namely in the depth of Scripture. "And then my mouth shall announce your praise"; as if to say: what I have in my heart, I will confess with my mouth.

[87289] "For if you had desired sacrifice." Here he excuses himself. And first, he shows that sacrifice is not acceptable to God; second, he shows what sacrifice is acceptable to God, at "A sacrifice to God." He says therefore: I promise teaching and praise, for this sacrifice will honor you; but carnal sacrifice is not acceptable to you; and therefore he says, "If you had desired sacrifice," namely carnal sacrifice, "I would indeed have given it; but you will not be delighted with burnt offerings." But does he not want carnal sacrifices? If God does not approve those sacrifices, why then did he command them to be made in the Old Law? It must be said that he commanded them to be made not for their own sake, but because they were a figure of the interior true sacrifice by which Christ offered himself; and they are signs of the interior sacrifice insofar as a person offers his soul to God. And again, they were instituted for the uneducated, who did not know God; and therefore it was necessary that they honor and know God through material things, lest they immolate sacrifices to idols, to which they were very much inclined. But because David, through the Holy Spirit, knew that the sacrifice of the heart is acceptable to God, he did not offer bodily sacrifices here. Among all sacrifices, burnt offerings were the most acceptable to God. And yet they were not acceptable to God for their own sake; therefore he says, "You will not be delighted with burnt offerings," because even if they had been acceptable to you, I would simply have offered them. And if it is objected that they were "a most sweet odor to the Lord," it must be said that this was because of the sacrifice they prefigured, and as a sign of the interior sacrifice, which is pleasing to God; hence he adds, "A sacrifice to God," namely one that is acceptable, "is a contrite spirit." Augustine, in City of God 10: Every sacrifice that is offered externally is a sign of an interior sacrifice, in which one offers one's soul to God. But it should be known that the soul of a person is led into sin first through vain joy. Eccl. 2: "Laughter I considered an error, and to joy I said: Why are you vainly deceived?" that is, led into sin. Second, it is hardened against spiritual things through sin. Sir. 3: "A hard heart shall fare ill at the last." Rom. 2: "According to your hardness and impenitent heart." Third, because it is self-sufficient in bodily things and does not care about spiritual things, then it becomes proud, which is the beginning of all sin, Sir. 10. It is necessary, therefore, that the penitent who offers his heart as a sacrifice to God do the opposite of all these things. And first, against vain joy, he must take on the sorrow of penance; and therefore he adds, "A sacrifice to God is a contrite spirit," that is, one who is sorrowful about all his sins together, not just about one. 2 Cor. 7: "The sorrow that is according to God works repentance unto steadfast salvation." Bar. 2: "The soul that is sorrowful over the greatness of evil and walks bowed down." And below: "gives you glory and sorrow to the Lord." Against the second is opposed contrition; hence he says, "a contrite heart." And note the difference between "broken" and "contrite": for "broken" things are divided into large parts; "contrite" things are divided into very small parts. Therefore, as long as someone has a hard heart, his heart is, as it were, intact in malice; but when he totally abandons sin, giving himself over to spiritual things, then he is said to be contrite. Job 16: "I, once prosperous" -- namely in temporal things -- "was suddenly crushed." Against the third is opposed humility; and therefore he says, "and a humbled heart, O God, you will not despise," because God resists the proud but gives grace to the humble, Jas. 4. And it should be known that he mentions heart and spirit, and spirit pertains to courage, and thus pertains to the irascible power. Is. 25: "The spirit of the strong, like a whirlwind driving against a wall." Heart pertains to the concupiscible power; and so through this it is given to understand that whatever is in the appetitive power must be offered to God in sacrifice.

[87290] "Deal favorably." Here he promises what he should do in the future. And first, he asks for something to be done by God; second, he pronounces, at "then you will accept." The eye of David was directed toward two things: one near, which was figurative; the other remote, which was the thing figured. The first, because it is read that David built the walls of the city of Jerusalem, but had not completed them, and after these were completed, the temple had to be built; and therefore he says, "Deal favorably in your good will, that the walls of Jerusalem may be built." And then, when the walls are built, the temple will be built. "And then you will accept sacrifice," etc. And all this was figurative. But if we refer to the thing figured, it must be said that there is a twofold Jerusalem: namely, the heavenly one. Gal. 4: "That Jerusalem which is above is free, which is our mother." The other is the present Church, modeled on the former. Rev. 21: "I saw the holy city, Jerusalem," etc. And each has walls. The walls of the heavenly Jerusalem are the defenses of eternity and immortality, which the saints have obtained through Christ. Rom. 8: "He who raised Jesus Christ will also give life to your mortal bodies." The walls of the present Jerusalem, namely the Church, are the sacraments of grace and the doctors. Ezek. 13: "You did not stand against, nor did you set up a wall for the house of Israel to stand in battle." He foresaw the building of these by the spirit of prophecy, Is. 56. Therefore, so that these walls may be built, "deal favorably, Lord," that is, show this kindness, which kindness the apostle says in Tit. 3 has been fulfilled: "The kindness and humanity of God our Savior appeared." And this not because of our merits, but because of your good will. Rom. 12: "That you may prove what is the good, acceptable, and perfect will of God." 1 Thess. 4: "This is the will of God," etc. "And do this so that the walls of Jerusalem may be built," whether militant or triumphant. But what will happen? "Then you will accept the sacrifice of justice." This is explained in three ways; and the first two modes pertain to the present Church. In one way, we may refer this to sacrifice not by which cattle are slaughtered, but by which men are killed for Christ; and in this there is a double degree, because the first place belongs to the sacrifice of Christ. Gal. 2: "He loved me and delivered himself for me"; and therefore he says, "then," that is, in the building of the walls of Jerusalem, that is, of the Church, "you will accept the sacrifice of justice," by which Christ offered himself, who is just. Jn. 8: "Which of you shall convict me of sin?" And because it is of such power that it could satisfy for man, so as to justify him. The second place belongs to other saints, who offered themselves to God as a sacrifice; hence he says, "oblations," namely confessors, who by confessing Christ offered themselves to death as far as they were able, even though they were not killed. Judg. 5: "You who of your own will offered your souls to danger in Israel, bless the Lord." "And burnt offerings": these are the martyrs. Jn. 15: "Greater love has no one," etc. "And then you will accept" when these same saints "shall lay themselves upon your altar" like calves, that is, upon your faith and upon Christ, that is, they shall expose themselves like calves for Christ and the faith of Christ, to be immolated. In another way, so that it may refer to the works of the just; and thus the sense is: you will accept justice as sacrifice, because works of justice and mercy are like a sacrifice. Heb. 13: "Do not forget to do good and to share; for by such sacrifices God's favor is won." "And then you will accept oblations." According to Gregory: a burnt offering is that which was entirely consumed by fire, and it signifies perfect men who give themselves wholly to God. Oblations are those who offer something and reserve something; and then priests shall place calves, that is, the newly converted, upon the altar, that is, upon the faith of Christ. Or then the higher prelates shall place preachers bellowing with the teaching of faith upon the altar, that is, upon the confession of faith. The third explanation concerns the heavenly Jerusalem; and the sense is: "then," namely when the walls of the heavenly Jerusalem shall be built, "you will accept the sacrifice of justice." Here, sometimes the sacrifice of penance is offered; but there, only that of praise. Is. 60: "Your people, all of them just, shall inherit the land forever." And this is that sacrifice of praise about which Ps. 83 says: "Blessed are they who dwell in your house; they shall praise you forever and ever." "And then oblations," that is, the lesser saints, "and burnt offerings," that is, the greater saints, "you will accept." And the Angels shall offer these, to whom it is said in Mt. 13: "Gather the wheat into my barn." And these Angels shall place the saints upon your altar, that is, into heavenly glory. Rev. 8: "And much incense was given to him, that he might offer it with the prayers of all the saints upon the golden altar." Ps. 68: "It shall please God better than a young calf that puts forth horns and hooves."