Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 47
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 47

[87255] Above, the Psalmist invited the nations to sing praise to God for the benefits of God; here, however, he describes the great exultation of the people or of the city. The title: "A Psalm, a song of praise of the sons of Korah, for the second day of the sabbath." Among the Jews, the sabbath was held as the most solemn day, and they named all the weekdays from the sabbath, so that Sunday was called the first of the sabbath, Monday was called the second of the sabbath, and so on for the other days. He says, therefore, "for the second of the sabbath," because in Gen. 1, on the first day God said, "Let there be light"; on the second day he said, "Let there be a firmament." By the light, Christ is understood; by the firmament, the Church is designated. Since, therefore, the Psalm treats here of the magnificence of the Church, it is fittingly said to be "for the second of the sabbath." In the Hebrew, however, and in Jerome, there is no "for the second of the sabbath." This Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. First, he describes the magnificence of the city. Second, he adds the thanksgiving, at "We have received, O God." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he describes the magnificence of the city. Second, he introduces testimony, at "For behold." The dignity of the city depends on its lord; and therefore, first he commends the lord. Second, the city, at "It is founded." He describes the lord from his own dignity and from his works. From his dignity, because "Great is the Lord": Ps. 76: "What God is great?" etc. And his greatness is the immensity of his goodness. Augustine says: "In those things that are great not by bulk, to be great is the same as to be good." From his works, because he is "exceedingly praiseworthy." Praise properly regards works. And he says "exceedingly," because however much you praise him, you still fall short of his praise: Sir. 43: "Glorifying God as much as you can, he will still prevail." And although this is evident in all creation, it appears especially in the benefits of grace by which the Church was established. And therefore he says, "In the city of our God," namely of the Church: Rev. 21: "I saw the holy city, the new Jerusalem," etc. And this city, namely the Church, is situated "on his holy mountain." This mountain is Christ. Is. 2: "The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be." Of this city it is said, Mt. 5: "A city set on a mountain cannot be hidden."

[87256] "It is founded." Here he commends the city in three ways. First, from its extent or joyfulness. Second, from its arrangement. Third, from the wisdom of its citizens. He says, therefore, "It is founded with the exultation of the whole earth." As if to say: it has been founded on the mountain, that is, Christ. But does this foundation pertain to one land only? No, but it overflows into the joy of the whole earth, because all share in the joy of this foundation: Ps. 65: "Shout joyfully to God, all the earth; sing a psalm," etc. Is. 51: "They shall come to Zion with praise": Lam. 1: "Is this the city of perfect beauty?" Another reading has, "It is founded." As if to say: great is the Lord. And I say the Lord, who is the founder of this city. And this "in exultation." "Mount Zion, on the sides of the north," that is, situated on the slope of Mount Zion toward the north. Zion signifies the Jews; the north signifies the Gentile idolaters. This city, therefore, is composed of Jews and Gentiles. Jerome has it differently, and it fits the mystery of the Bride: "The beautiful branch, the joy of the whole earth, of Mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the small city of the great king." And it is explained according to the mystery. This city is praised for the civilization it cultivates and for the humanity that Christ assumed. I say that it is great; and this is from the beautiful branch itself, that is, Christ. And this is the joy of the whole earth. In the Hebrew it reads, "Beautiful exceedingly of exultation," namely Christ, and this is on Mount Zion. "God will be known in its houses." Here he commends the city for the wisdom of its citizens; for true wisdom consists in the knowledge of God. Jer. 9: "Let the one who glories, glory in this: to know and understand me." And therefore he commends it from the fact that God is known in it, and says, "God will be known in its houses." There is a threefold knowledge of God, because this can refer to the state of the city of Jerusalem, and to the Church, and to future glory. One knowledge of God, therefore, is figurative and obscure; and this knowledge existed in the Old Testament. And such knowledge was in that city, namely Jerusalem, and in the Jewish people. Ps. 75: "God is known in Judah," etc. And according to this it is said, "God will be known in its houses." Jerome has, "God has been recognized," etc., namely not in one place, but in all homes and cities. And he says "in its houses"; for among the Athenians, God was known. Acts 17: "In him we live and move and have our being." Rom. 1: "The invisible things of God," etc. But he was not known in households, but in schools among a few; whereas in that nation, all knew God. Another knowledge is real but obscure and imperfect; and this is the knowledge by which God is known through faith. 1 Cor. 13: "Now we see through a mirror," etc. And thus "God is known in the houses" with a real knowledge, but of faith; 2 Cor. 3: "But we, with unveiled face, beholding the glory of the Lord." And he says "in houses," because the whole universal Church contains under itself many churches and many communities, each of which is said to be a house possessing the knowledge of God. Jer. 31: "All shall know me, from the least to the greatest." Another knowledge is real, and it is a perfect and open knowledge. 1 Cor. 13: "Then I shall know even as I am known" -- in the houses of the heavenly Jerusalem. And the many houses are said to be the different orders of saints: namely, of apostles, martyrs, confessors, and virgins, etc. Jn. 14: "In my Father's house there are many mansions." And according to this, in the Roman Psalter it is said: "God will be known in its steps," because not all will know equally, but there will be different degrees of knowledge, according to some. 1 Cor. 15: "Star differs from star in brightness." But this will be "when he receives her" to help her, because he himself is our protector and helper. Another reading of Jerome has, "in helping."

[87257] "For behold." Here he proves the dignity of the city through testimony. And first he introduces the witnesses. Second, their integrity. Third, their confession. For testimony to be credible, three things are necessary: namely, the dignity of the witnesses, that they be witnesses of authority, because if they are frivolous, their testimony should not be approved. Also their number, and their agreement. And these three things are found in these witnesses. They are of great dignity, because "the kings of the earth." One was Constantine; another was Justinian; and Charlemagne, who strengthened the Church with privileges. Also, many of them came from different nations and different times. By "kings" can also be understood the wise and the just, who bore witness to the Church after being converted to the faith. Ps. 46: "The princes of the peoples." Also they are in agreement: "They came together as one," namely in one testimony and judgment. Ps. 101: "When the peoples gather as one, and the kings," etc. It can also be explained differently; however, the first explanation is the literal one, because in Jerome it reads, "They bore witness." In the Greek it reads, "They will receive it," namely to defend it. And this is necessary, "For behold, the kings of the earth gathered together; they came together as one," namely against the Church. And those who at one time bore witness, at another time were against the Church and at one time persecuted it, and afterward strengthened it. "They themselves seeing." Here he describes their integrity, and there are seven elements. The first is vision, that is, the knowledge of faith; hence he says, "They themselves seeing," that is, knowing through faith the miracles that Christ and the apostles were performing. Is. 62: "The nations shall see your just one, and all kings your illustrious one." The second is admiration at the things seen, because they are above human sense and reason. Is. 60: "You shall see and overflow and wonder, and your heart shall be expanded." Ps. 138: "Your works are wonderful." The third is distress for their sins. On account of the second, "They marveled." On account of the third, "They were troubled." Ps. 59: "You have shaken the earth and troubled it." The fourth is being moved to action. Sometimes one is troubled about sin and falls into despair or persists in evil; but these were moved to penance. Is. 24: "The earth shall be moved with moving." The fifth is that this movement should be accompanied by the fear of God, so that one does not attribute to oneself that one is moved to good, but to God. And he says, "Trembling seized them." Ps. 2: "Serve the Lord with fear." This pain and trembling is fruitful; hence he says, "There were pains as of a woman in labor," pains that are turned into joy on account of the hope of offspring and fruit. Is. 26: "From your fear, O Lord, we have conceived and brought forth the spirit of salvation." And this is the sixth. The seventh is: "With a vehement wind you will shatter the ships of Tarshish," that is, the sea universally, and so you will shatter the ships of the sea. Or it should be said that there is a province called Cilicia, and Tarshish is its capital, where Paul was born, and from that city the whole region is named Tarshish, and there are many ships there. Or, just as in the Mediterranean Sea the first navigators built Carthage, and these, fighting together with the Tyrians, prevailed -- and therefore Tarshish is used to designate the whole sea of the world. By ships, which go out for commerce, cupidity is signified, that is, the abundance of worldly goods. And just as ships toss on the sea, so the rich toss about in worldly affairs. But when a person is converted to penance, then the ships, that is, the desires of this world, will be shattered. But "with a vehement wind," namely the Holy Spirit. Obad. 1: "Near is the day of the Lord upon all nations." Is. 23: "Wail, you ships of the sea." But according to Cassiodorus, through this the entire time of the incarnation of Christ is designated. "God will be known in its houses when he receives it," that is, human nature in the unity of a person. Is. 52: "Therefore my people shall know my name." And why? "For behold, the kings of the earth gathered together; they came together as one." Kings, namely the leaders of the Jews and the Scribes of the people, were gathered by Herod inquiring of them where Christ was to be born. And they came together in one conclusion, namely that he was born in Bethlehem. And seeing thus, as the prophets had said, they marveled; they were moved, because Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him, Mt. 2; and they were moved, some to faith. And so great was the terror that the body trembled: "Trembling seized them." And there were "pains as of a woman in labor," on account of the slaughter of the infants killed by Herod. "And with a vehement wind," because in his fury, he sent men to kill all the boys from two years old and under. And in his fury he had all the ships of Tarshish burned, that is, in Tarsus of Cilicia, which he believed had carried the Magi, returning by another route, back to their homeland. Therefore he says, "With a vehement wind."

[87258] "As we have heard." Here the confession and testimony of the witnesses is set forth. And first they confess the truth of what they have heard. "As we have heard," through the preaching of the apostles, "so we have seen," that is, we have perceived it to be true. This they said when they were converted to Christ. Or, so that it may be the conversion of the Jews: "We heard through the prophets, and behold, now we have seen." But it sometimes happens that someone hears something great and does not believe it to be so until he experiences it; and this Jacob said, Gen. 28: "Truly this place is holy," etc. 1 Kgs. 10: "The Queen of Sheba, who came to verify what she had heard, did not, however, believe the greatness of Solomon's wisdom"; and she saw more incredible things in him than she had heard. And so it is with these, who see more than they hear before they come to the faith. And where do we see? "In the city of the Lord of hosts," namely of the heavenly hosts. Here he shows that he can lead you there. And lest it be believed that he is so exalted that you cannot go to him, he says, "In the city of our God." As if to say: he is so much the God of hosts that he is nevertheless our God. And he has founded it, namely this city, not for a time, but "forever." Sir. 26: "Eternal foundations upon solid rock."

[87259] "We have received." Above, the Psalmist set forth the great things of the city; here, however, he sets forth the thanksgiving. And concerning this he does two things. First, the thanksgiving is set forth. Second, people are invited to consider still further the great things of this city, at "Go around." As it is said elsewhere, "All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth." Hence the thanksgiving pertains first to the effects of divine mercy. Second, it pertains to the effects of justice, at "Your right hand is full of justice." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he proposes the perfection of divine mercy. Second, the effect of this perfection, at "According to your name." According to the surface of the letter, this is read from the perspective not of the Jews, but of those who marvel and say, "As we have heard," etc. "We have received, O God, your mercy." This likewise can be read from the perspective of the Jews. But he says, "We have received," etc. The mercy of the Lord is understood in three ways: namely, as the effect of grace, which effect is conferred in the sacraments of Christ. Tit. 3: "According to his own mercy he saved us through the washing of regeneration," etc. And in the Church, all commonly receive mercy; but the good, together with the sacraments, receive mercy, that is, grace and the effect of the sacrament; the wicked, however, receive only the sacrament. The good therefore say: "We have received your mercy," that is, your grace, "in the midst of your temple." In the temple, sinners are at the edges; in the midst of the temple are the virtuous and just. In another way, mercy is Christ himself, who was given to us out of God's mercy: Ps. 101: "For the time to have mercy on it has come." And so this can be explained of a twofold temple and a twofold reception: namely, bodily -- and so these words belong to the just Simeon. O God, we have received your mercy, namely Christ, in our arms, in the midst of your temple, namely the material temple. Also of the reception of faith; and the sense is: O God, we have received Christ, mercifully given, through faith. Jas. 1: "In meekness receive the implanted word." "In the midst of the temple," that is, in the consensus of the Church; because those who do not receive the common teaching of the Church do not receive this mercy. Sir. 15: "In the midst of the Church he opened his mouth." "According to your name, O God." Here the effect of this reception is set forth. As if to say: by the fact that we have received your name, your praise has been spread throughout the whole earth. And this "according to your name, O God," who is essentially good. And whoever knows God according to that measure praises him according to how he knows him. And therefore he says, "According to your name, O God," that is, according to the knowledge one has of you, "so also is your praise." And because he is known everywhere, therefore he says, "To the ends of the earth." Mal. 1: "From the rising of the sun to its setting, great is my name among the nations." Or "to the ends of the earth," that is, in the whole Church, which is spread everywhere. Or, because your true praise is only among the saints who truly praise you, because they truly know you: Jn. 7: "I know him." "Your right hand is full of justice." Here he commends justice. And first he sets forth the commendation of justice. Second, he sets forth its effect. I say, therefore, that "we have received your mercy"; and this not without justice; indeed, "your right hand is full of justice." The hand of God is called his operative power. And God has two hands: namely, the right hand, by which he rewards the good, and the left hand, by which he punishes the wicked. Mt. 25: "He will set the sheep on his right," etc. In both hands there is justice; but in the left hand there is not full justice, because he punishes less than what is deserved. But in the right hand there is full justice, because he rewards abundantly. Lk. 6: "A good measure," etc. Rom. 8: "I consider that the sufferings are not worthy to be compared," etc. "Your right hand," that is, the future glory, "is full of justice," because there no one is present except the just. Is. 60: "Your people shall all be just." "Let Mount Zion rejoice." Here the effect of the justice wrought by the left hand is set forth, and it is groaning; but the effect of the justice wrought by the right hand is joy. Ps. 18: "The ordinances of the Lord are right, gladdening hearts." Above he said that the effect of mercy extends to the ends of the earth; here, however, he attributes the effect of justice to Mount Zion and to the daughters of Judah. The Apostle also says this, Rom. 15: "I say that Christ Jesus was a minister of the circumcision on account of," etc. Because, therefore, he was promised to the daughter of Zion: Zech. 9: "Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion," etc. "Let Mount Zion rejoice," because it belongs to justice that the promise be kept. But since no promise was made to the Gentiles, it was mercy that it was given. Nevertheless, it can be said that Mount Zion refers to all of Jerusalem. "And let the daughters of Judah," that is, of confession, that is, the whole Jewish people, "rejoice." And let them do this "on account of your judgments, O Lord," because they are right.

[87260] "Go around." Here he leads to a more diligent consideration, so that it may be understood that kings have already sometimes seen the great things; but David invites all to consider further. And first he invites to this. Second, he adds the reason for the invitation. He says, therefore, "Go around," namely the Church militant or triumphant, with the eye of contemplation: Song 3: "I will arise and go about," etc. Some go around the Church with an iniquitous eye, to attack it; but we go around it in order to love it. And therefore he says, "Embrace it," namely by loving: Ps. 25: "Lord, I have loved the beauty of your house." Jerome has, "Go around, as if going outside, and go around through the streets, and recount in its towers." Here he leads to consideration in spiritual matters. In a city there are three magnificent things: namely, towers, walls, and streets. As to the first, he says, "Recount in its towers." Jerome has, "Marvel at its towers." Towers are for seeing from afar. The towers of the Church, therefore, are the prelates, and the apostles were its towers. As if to say: marvel at the apostles and prelates. Or "recount," that is, the doctors [recount] according to the doctrine of the apostles and doctors. As to the second, he says, "Set your hearts upon its strength." Jerome has, "Set your heart upon its ramparts." And this is the power of the Holy Spirit, who protects this city: Lk. 24: "Stay in the city until you are clothed with power." This power is love: Song 8: "Love is strong as death." As to the third, he says, "And distribute its houses." Jerome has, "Separate its houses, distinguish its palaces." Distinguish, namely by right judgment. For there are some who, on account of a few bad people, wish to condemn the whole Church. He says, therefore, "Distribute," that is, you ought not to condemn the good on account of the wicked: Gen. 18: "Far be it from you, Lord, to destroy the just with the wicked." Or, "Distribute its houses," namely by assigning different churches to different ministers, so that there may be no confusion in the Church -- just as Paul was the apostle of the Gentiles, and Peter was the minister of the circumcision, that is, the apostle of the Jews. Another reading has "its steps," that is, its different orders: some subdeacons, some deacons, and some priests: Eph. 4: "And he himself gave some as apostles," etc. The purpose of this consideration is the praise of God. And first he sets forth to whom the praise of God should be announced. Second, why it should be announced. He says, therefore, "That you may recount," namely what you have heard: Is. 21: "What I have heard from the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have announced to you." Because what one person has received, he ought to share with another: "In another generation," namely to sinners. Or "another," that is, the future generation. And what should you recount? Two things: because all preaching ought to be directed toward two ends: namely, toward showing the magnificence of God, as when one preaches the faith; or toward announcing the benefits of God, so that charity may be kindled in their hearts. As to the first, he says, "For this is God, our God": Bar. 3: "And after this, on earth," etc. Heb. 13: "Jesus Christ, yesterday and today, the same forever." As to the second, he says, "He himself will rule us forever": Mt. 28: "Behold, I am with you," etc. Ps. 22: "The Lord rules me, and nothing," etc.
