Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 17
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 17

[86905] In the preceding Psalm the Psalmist prayed to be delivered from his enemies; here, having been delivered, he gives thanks. And first he gives thanks for the benefit of deliverance. Second, he breaks forth into praise of the deliverer, at "the heavens declare the glory of God." The title: "Unto the end, for the servant of the Lord, David. And he spoke the words of this canticle on the day the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies and from the hand of Saul." And this Psalm is found word for word in 2 Sam. 22. The historical context is that in 1 Sam. 19 we read how Saul sought to kill him; and after Saul's death, in 2 Sam. 2, Abner and his son again fought against him. Finally David had victory over them. And so he composed this Psalm. And Jerome says the same. And because Christ is signified through David, all these things can be referred to Christ, either according to the head or according to the body, namely the Church, because she was delivered from Saul, that is, from death -- for "Saul" is interpreted as "petition," because he was given at the people's request, or rather extorted. Hence he was not given to endure permanently. So Christ first endures death, and afterward remains at rest, according to the Gloss. He is also delivered from all enemies, Jews and demons, and as regards his body, that is, the Church. Now this part is divided into three sections. In the first he commemorates in general the benefit of deliverance. In the second he shows the power of the deliverer, at "it was moved." In the third, the manner of deliverance, at "he sent from on high," etc. Regarding the first he does two things. First he commemorates the affection he conceived from the aforesaid benefit. Second he shows the effect following from it, at "praising." A twofold affection arose in him from this benefit: namely love and hope. And first he sets forth the first; second, the second, at "my God." First he sets forth the affection of love toward God. Second, the reason for it, at "my strength." He says therefore: O Lord who have delivered me, I will always love you, because I will remain in you: Jn. 15: "Abide in love." Rom. 8: "I am certain that neither life nor death, nor angels, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of Christ." For to love with the will belongs to rational beings; to love in general is common to all. Judg. 5: "Let those who love you shine as the sun in its rising." Now the reason for loving someone is on account of one's own good. Hence when someone considers his good to depend on another, this is the reason why he loves him. David considered his entire good to be from God; hence he says, "I will love you, for you are my strength." Strength has the power to fortify the soul, lest one retreat from the good on account of threatening difficulties. But how God is his strength, he shows. A person needs strength for two things. First in good things, that he may be established in them; and therefore he says, "the Lord is my firmament," that is, my firm foundation: 2 Sam. 22: "The Lord is my rock." Mt. 7: "Everyone who hears my words and does them is like a man building his house upon rock." Also in evil things, and this for two purposes. In one way, before evil comes, so that he may flee; hence he says, "my refuge": Prov. 14: "The name of the Lord is a most strong tower." Ps. 103: "The rock is a refuge for hedgehogs." In another way, after evils have come, so that he may be delivered; hence he says, "and my deliverer."

[86906] "My God." Here he sets forth the affection of hope. And there is a difference between hope and love, because love is a unitive power -- for we love something insofar as we consider it our own; and therefore he says that God is his strength: Is. 12: "The Lord is my strength and my praise, and he has become my salvation." Hope implies defense from without; and God does both. Or thus: the object of hope is a good that is arduous, future, and possible to attain. Just as one loves on account of a good already given, so one hopes for a future good from the confidence conceived from love and from similar experiences, inasmuch as he believes he will receive similar things in the future. And therefore here he does three things. First he hopes for the refuge and firmament that consists in good things. Second he asks for protection against evils that have already occurred. He says therefore first, "My God, my helper": Ps. 93: "Unless the Lord had helped me, my soul would soon have dwelt in hell," etc. "And I will hope in him": Sir. 2: "You who fear the Lord, hope in him, and mercy shall come to you with delight." Second, we hope to be freed from evils to which we have not yet been subjected, because he defends us. First, lest we be harmed. Second, that we may overcome them, and for the victory he crowns us. As to the first he says, "my protector." Jerome has "shield," which protects so that one cannot be pierced by evils; so God does: Ps. 63: "You have protected me, O God, from the assembly of the malignant." As to the second he says, "and the horn of my salvation," because animals strike with their horn; so the power of God resists against adversaries, because he fights to overcome temporal and spiritual evils: Ps. 43: "In you we shall gore our enemies with the horn, and in your name we shall despise those who rise up against us." 1 Sam. 2: "My heart has rejoiced in the Lord, and my horn is exalted in my God," that is, my power. As to the third, "and my upholder." When someone conquers, he is received in triumph; so also God does: Jn. 14: "I will come again and will take you to myself, that where I am, you also may be." Ps. 72: "You have received me with glory." A similar passage is found in 2 Sam. 22. Next he sets forth the consequent effect, namely praise. Praise is speech that elucidates the greatness of power, or at least follows from this. First therefore he sets forth the praise. Second, its efficacy. He says therefore, "Praising, I will call upon the Lord"; as if to say: from this I do not have praise of my own, but I seek yours, because you have done it. Is. 63: "I will remember the mercies of the Lord, the praise of the Lord for all the things he has bestowed upon me." "And I will call upon" you securely and with efficacy, because thus calling, "I shall be saved from my enemies": Joel 2: "Everyone who shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved."

[86907] "They surrounded me." Here the necessity of deliverance is set forth. And first he shows the magnitude of deliverance. Second, the prayer he pours forth to God in tribulation. Third, he sets forth the hearing of his prayer, "he heard." Note that these three -- iniquity, death, and hell -- are ordered to one another in this way: that from iniquity a person is led to death, and through death is led down to hell; and just as the first is the way to the second, so the second is to the third. And therefore first he speaks of the first progression. Second, of the second, that from death they go to hell, at "the sorrows of hell," etc. First he does two things. First he sets forth the manner. Second, the way to it, namely iniquity, "the torrents of iniquity." The pain of death is the greatest: 1 Sam. 15: "Does bitter death so separate?" Sir. 41: "O death, how bitter is the remembrance of you." Hence when one cannot escape it, then the pains surround him; and the more so, the more inescapable they are. The way is iniquity; as if to say: therefore I fear it, because "the torrents of iniquity have disturbed me." A torrent is a flow of water rushing down with force: Job 6: "Like a torrent that passes swiftly through the valleys." Therefore the sudden force of interior iniquity, such as a sudden and grave temptation, is a torrent driving one toward sin. Or of exterior iniquity, such as the assault of some enemy. And these "have disturbed me."

[86908] "The sorrows." Here he pursues the second progression; and therefore he says, "the sorrows of hell," that is, sorrows similar to those of hell: Gen. 37: "I shall go down mourning into hell." Or the sorrows that are conceived from fear of hell. And these surround one when they are unavoidable. And these sorrows come because "the snares of death have anticipated me." What death? Prov. 21: "He who gathers treasures by a lying tongue is vain and foolish, and shall stumble upon the snares of death." Behold the necessity. But he applied the remedy of prayer. And first prayer is set forth; and therefore he says, "In my tribulation I called upon the Lord." Hos. 6: "In their tribulation they will rise early to me." Bar. 3: "Now, O Lord God," etc. Is. 55: "Seek the Lord while he may be found," etc. Ps. 49: "Call upon me in the day of tribulation, and I will deliver you." Wis. 7: "I called upon God, and the spirit of wisdom came to me." Next the devotion of the one praying is set forth, because "I cried out to my Lord," that is, with great devotion of the one praying: Ps. 119: "To the Lord in my tribulation," etc. Heb. 5: "With a strong cry and tears offering, he was heard." And he says, "I cried out to my Lord," not to a stranger. Deut. 10: "You shall worship the Lord your God," etc. Third, the hearing of the prayer is set forth, "he heard." He had said two things: that he called and that he cried out. And therefore he says that both his voice and his cry were heard. From where? "From his holy temple he heard my voice." The temple of God is the very excellence of his holiness, because the Lord is his own temple: Rev. 21: "I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God almighty is the temple thereof," etc. Likewise the temple is Christ himself: Jn. 2: "But he spoke of the temple of his body," in which God is by the union of the person. Also the just soul, in which God is by grace: 1 Cor. 3: "For the temple of God is holy, which you are." Also the Blessed Virgin: Ps. 5: "I will worship toward your holy temple," in whom, that is, through whom God heard us: Ps. 33: "He heard me and delivered me from all my tribulations." Also the Church: Ps. 10: "The Lord is in his holy temple." And from any of these temples he heard: 3 Kgs. 8: "If anyone shall know the wound of his heart, and shall spread forth his hands in this house, you will hear in the place of your dwelling." And not only does he say the prayer was heard, but also the cry; therefore he says, "and my cry before him entered into his ears." And he says "before him," that is, in his sight, because he sees all things: Ex. 3: "Seeing I have seen the affliction," etc. Or "before him," that is, in his good pleasure; or in the heart, where he alone beholds: 1 Sam. 16: "Man sees those things that appear, but God beholds the heart." "And it entered into his ears," by acceptance: Jas. 5: "Their cry has entered into the ears of the Lord." Or "into his ears," that is, into his clemency: Sir. 35: "The prayer of him who humbles himself shall pierce the clouds."

[86909] "It was moved." Above the Psalmist treated the affection conceived from the benefits of deliverance; here he treats the power of the deliverer. The power of an agent is shown from the agent's effect; and the things said here can pertain to a twofold effect of God: namely to the one shown in corporeal things, and to the effect of redemption. And perhaps more truly to both, because the things said here under the figure of corporeal things are spiritually fulfilled through the effect of redemption. Now the effect of divine power is most manifestly shown in corporeal things, because spiritual things are less known to us; and especially in those things that people wonder at; and these are the disturbances of the elements, namely earth, air, water, and fire. Therefore this part is divided into three parts. First he shows God's power in the effects that concern the earth. Second, in the changes of the air. Third, in the changes of the waters. The second, at "he inclined the heavens." The third, at "the fountains of waters appeared." But if it is referred to the mystery, it is divided into two. First he shows the fruit of the divine redemption accomplished through Christ. Second, the manner of it, at "he inclined the heavens." The first is divided into two. Referring to the first, he first treats the effect of the earth, which comes from below. Second, of that which ascends from above. If mystically, then a twofold effect of redemption is shown: namely the repentance of sinners, and the devotion of the just, at "there ascended." But according as it refers to the corporeal effect from below the earth, the most wondrous effect is the earthquake, etc. Here he touches on three things. First, the disturbance itself. Second, what makes it wondrous. Third, its cause. He says therefore, "The earth was moved and trembled." Something is moved in two ways. In one way something is moved from place to place, and thus the earth is not moved. In another way, in the manner of trembling, and thus what makes the earthquake wondrous is the shaking of the mountains; for if soft earth were moved, it would not be remarkable, but when the mountains are moved, then it is wondrous. And therefore he says, "they were disturbed," because they seem to have lost their stability. The first cause is the divine will; and he expresses this metaphorically when he says, "because he was angry with them," namely God. Just as when a lord is disturbed, those who attend him tremble, so at God's disturbance all things are disturbed. Mystically, the disturbance of people toward repentance is signified by this. Also, among them some are lesser, and these are signified by the earth; hence he says, "the earth was moved and trembled," that is, those who were formerly sinners and earthly: Is. 51: "You have made your heart as the ground, and as a way for those passing through." This was moved by affection from earthly things to heavenly things, and this from the trembling conceived from fear of punishments: Is. 26: "From your fear, O Lord, we have conceived, and have been as it were in labor, and have brought forth the spirit of salvation." Some are great, and these are called mountains, that is, those who are proud in the world. They were moved by the coming of Christ. The foundations of the mountains are those things in which they are established, namely riches, powers, and honors: Ps. 45: "The mountains are carried into the heart of the sea" -- that is, they are disturbed when adversities come; and afterward they are completely moved: Is. 23: "The Lord of hosts has purposed this, to pull down all the pride of glory, and to bring to disgrace all the renowned of the earth." All kingdoms and powers that have a beginning will have a decline. The reason is "because he was disturbed at them." This can be understood in two ways. If of the wicked, there is no doubt that by the vengeance of God, which is called wrath, they will be overthrown. If of the good, that is, because the wrath of God was made known to them, therefore they are converted. For it was made known through him: Rom. 1: "The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and injustice of those who hold the truth of God in injustice."

[86910] "There ascended." Here, expounding corporally, the effect from above is set forth. Now the effect of the earth from above is when the earth is burned by celestial fire in some part of itself; and regarding this he does two things. First he touches on the matter itself. Second, the kindling of the fire and the burning. Its matter is dry smoke dissolved and ascending until it is inflamed; and therefore he says, "smoke ascended in his wrath," that is, by his will, that is, God's, by which he thus punishes. "From his face," that is, from his power, "fire blazed forth," that is, was kindled; "and coals," that is, combustible matter, were set ablaze here. Mystically, two things are signified by this: namely the devotion of prayer and the inflammation of charity. "There ascended": and from this the wrath of God against sinners is considered. "Smoke ascended," of devout prayer: Rev. 8: "The smoke of the incense ascended," that is, of the fire of charity. "From his face," that is, Christ's, "it blazed forth": Lk. 12: "I came to cast fire upon the earth." "Coals were kindled by him," namely those receptive of kindling. A coal once had fire; so a person from the beginning had charity, but was extinguished; but these were kindled by Christ. Also coals that are not moist are thus kindled, but moist ones are not -- like those moist with the flow of carnal things: Ps. 119: "Sharp arrows of the mighty with coals," etc. "The earth was moved and trembled; the foundations of the mountains were disturbed and were moved, because he was angry with them." God is said to be angry because he bears himself in the manner of one who is angry, not in himself, but as to the effect; now an angry lord makes his servant tremble, and a lion its cub. For which it should be known that the power containing the members is released outwardly and returns inwardly, namely to the heart, as if fleeing and yielding to the imagined evil, or to the power rising against it that it cannot resist, and the members tremble, just as a wall trembles when its foundation is shaken. For the soul contains the body and is, as it were, its foundation; and a part of the soul sustains a part of the body. Hence when the foundation is shaken, the wall is shaken; and when the power is disturbed, the member is disturbed. Thus therefore the effect of anger in an animal is trembling. Now an animal is said to tremble when a part of it is shaken while the whole remains in the same place; and similarly, because this occurs in an earthquake, the earth is said to tremble by likeness to animals. For God is said to be angry at the earth in an earthquake. Or thus: in a human being there are four things: namely reason, sensitive powers, nature, and the body. But in the world there are God, angels, animals, plants, and elements. For we see that when an evil is imagined which the body cannot resist, the body immediately trembles -- not from cognition, but by a certain natural order or naturally, inasmuch as the power of the imagined evil is stronger. And similarly, when God turns his power upon the earth, although it does not know wrath, it naturally trembles. "The foundations," that is, certain cavities or hollow earth, which when moved cause the mountains to shake. "Because he was angry," etc. The first cause is the will of God or his power willing to act upon them; but he does this through secondary causes, so that all secondary causes are compared to the earth as the imagined evil moving the members. "Smoke ascended." Note here that according to the Philosopher, from moist earth a warm and moist vapor is released by the power of the sun's heat; but from dry earth, a dry and warm vapor; and naturally the second ascends higher than the first. For the latter is likened to fire, the former to air; and this vapor the Psalmist calls smoke, according to its warm and dry quality. The Philosopher, however, calls it the matter of combustion. For this vapor, carried aloft, with a slight increase of heat, is kindled in a circular motion. This dry smoke, if it has length and breadth, after it is kindled, is called a flame. For a flame, according to the Philosopher, is the burning of a dry exhalation. If it has length only, it is called a "daly" or firebrand, and "aegibes" or goats, and stars. A "daly" is when that combustible matter is long and continuous without scintillation. "Goats" is the name when there is scintillation, that is, when it seems to leap and run about, like goats. "Stars" is when the matter is discontinuous and seems to fly like stars; and this has the least matter. There is also another kind of star, which is cold expelling heat; and such stars do not seem to fly but rather to be cast down, as the Philosopher says; and they are generated not from entirely dry smoke, but from a vapor that is more moist and warm, which by its nature does not ascend as high as the dry, as has been said. And because it is dry, it is affected by the cold and repelled, and is projected downward. And this happens during the day and in clear weather; otherwise it would be extinguished by the density and moisture of the air. And because it is seen during the day, this is a sign that it is near the earth. Now it is kindled in two ways: by continuation, as an upper flame kindles a lower lamp; or by motion from cold and compression, or the concentration of heat. Thus he says, "smoke ascended," that is, dry exhalation, "in his wrath," that is, by the will of him who wills to act upon it. "And fire," that is, that smoke which is called fire also by the Philosopher at the beginning of the Metaphysics, as it were because it does not have a proper name -- just as moist exhalation is called vapor; but it is called fire because it is disposed to ascend and because it is warm and dry like fire. For "this fire blazed forth," that is, was kindled, namely by God as by the first cause; and this kindled fire is called a firebrand, flame, and star -- stars, I say, generated in the first way, as was said. "And coals were kindled by him," that is, stars generated in the second way. Or thus: "The earth was moved," etc. A dry vapor raised from the earth by the power of the sun's heat is sometimes thin, and then it is raised higher and produces intensification, as was said above. Sometimes on the surface of the earth it is somewhat thicker; hence, repelled by the cold, it does not ascend as high, and becomes wind. Sometimes a thicker dry vapor is raised within the earth, which on account of its thickness and the solidity and depth of the earth does not expire outward, but is enclosed in the earth and collects in some cavity of the earth similar to itself, and is compressed by some body not similar to it in kind, and thus is agitated in the bowels of the earth; and thus it moves it. Nor is this surprising, since we see the wind making waves like mountains in the sea, and on land uprooting trees and causing buildings to collapse, and in the air producing the greatest tempests. That wind is the cause of earthquakes is indicated by the fact that before an earthquake there is usually calm from winds; but after an earthquake there are winds. The matter of the earthquake, refined by the heat of the sun, expires from the earth, and thus the earthquake ceases and wind arises. The cause of the earthquake is the driving of one wind by another; and for this reason it cannot occur in the whole earth at once, but lasts for up to two hundred miles at most, as Seneca says. And he says that an earthquake separated Sicily from Calabria and Spain from Africa. And it lasts sometimes for forty days, sometimes for a year. Also note that solid earth from which vapor cannot exit outward is apt to be moved quickly; for earth that is of a stony nature is not easily moved and shaken. Nevertheless, it must be porous on some side, so that vapor may enter; so that it enters through the pores and is contained by the solidity. And if you say that if it enters it cannot exit, it should be said that this cannot always happen, because sometimes the entry and rising of vapor to that place continues uninterruptedly. And again, because heat does not go downward, the ocean wave cooperates in this by closing the pores and, as it were, reclosing them below against the cold. Hence cavernous places near the sea frequently produce earthquakes. Also note that this vapor continually exits from the earth to some extent, and therefore during earthquakes, animals that carry their heads near the ground are often infected by that poisonous vapor exiting from the earth.

[86911] "He inclined." Here he treats of the winds. Note that the matter of wind is a dry vapor or exhalation that is heated but not so refined that it can ascend to the highest place, nor so heated; hence it is impeded by the cold, thickened, and repelled downward. And this, repelled, moves the air. Nevertheless, it has enough warmth that it is not so overcome by the cold as to be converted to earth; and it is called haze, and is said to be "under his feet," because it is not as high as that which is kindled into flame. But sometimes it is not immediately repelled, but agitates the clouds, because it is not totally overcome nor does it return directly downward to the earth; and on account of this tortuous motion, it strives, as it were, to ascend upward but cannot because of the repulsion. And this is what he says.

[86912] "And he flew." Here he treats of the changes of the air according to corporeal effects; and there is a threefold change: namely in winds, in clouds, and in thunder; and he treats of each. Regarding the first he proposes three things. First, the efficient cause of all these changes. Second, the matter. Third, the manner. Now the cause of all these is the celestial body, which by its motion causes these alterations of the air; and therefore he says, "he inclined the heavens," that is, he directed the power of the celestial bodies toward these effects, because they have this from God. "And he descended." Although God, remaining immovable, works all things, he is nevertheless said to move through his effect, inasmuch as he produces mobile effects. Wis. 7: "Wisdom is more mobile than all mobile things." And according to this he is said to descend, inasmuch as he causes the power of the heavens to descend. The matter of the winds is haze, or dry smoke, not so thin that it ascends all the way to fire, but subsisting; and he says, "under his feet," that is, under his power; and all of it is from God. The manner: "He ascended upon the Cherubim." It should be noted that the Jews imagine that just as a king has a chariot, so God also has a chariot, which is the Cherubim; and they imagine God as corporeal and similar to the Cherubim. And therefore in Jerome's Psalter it is said even word for word, "He rode upon the Cherubim." And these have a false imagination, because the things said figuratively in Scripture are signs of spiritual truth. Now divine wisdom is said to move inasmuch as it causes motion in mobile things. But whatever God causes in these lower things, he causes through the ministry of spiritual creatures; hence Augustine says that God moves corporeal creatures through spiritual ones. But the spiritual creature does not do this by its own power, but with God presiding. And the Cherubim are said to do this especially because the name is interpreted as "fullness of knowledge," and God does all things through his knowledge. And he is said to be "above the Cherubim" because God's knowledge exceeds that of the angels. And therefore God does this, "flying," that is, causing to fly. And through the Cherubim, that is, through his knowledge, and above them whom he exceeds. And he said "he flew" because the motion of the wind is not uniform; and he says "the wings of the winds" on account of the swiftness of their motion. Mystically, the mystery of the incarnation is set forth here. And first the incarnation of Christ is set forth, through which he went out and came into the world. Second, his ascension, by which he went to the Father, at "he ascended upon the Cherubim." Third, those things that were done in the Church after Christ's ascension, "and he made darkness." He says therefore, "He inclined the heavens and descended," etc. If some great person shows humility to some lowly person from a village, he is said to do an injury and abasement to the whole place over which he presides. So the Son of Man is said to humble himself and incline the heavens, because he willed to come to us in humility. "He descended," that is, he appeared visibly: Bar. 3: "Afterward he was seen upon earth and conversed with men." 1 Jn. 1: "What we have seen and heard and our hands have handled of the word of life." He descended therefore by humility, taking on human flesh, dying, and teaching humble things. Or "he inclined the heavens," that is, the preachers, "and descended," making them say things comprehensible to men. "And haze," that is, the devil and all the wicked, "under his feet," that is, Christ's: Ps. 109: "I will make your enemies your footstool." Of the ascension he says, "He ascended upon the Cherubim." Eph. 4: "He who descended is the same who ascended above all the heavens, that he might fill all things." "Above the Cherubim," that is, above the orders of angels: Eph. 1: "Setting him at his right hand in the heavenly places, above all principality and power and virtue and dominion," etc. "And he subjected all things under his feet, and gave him as head over all the Church, which is his body." Jer. 32: "O most mighty, great, and powerful, the Lord of hosts is your name, great in counsel and incomprehensible in thought." And he says especially "above the Cherubim," because he not only ascended so as to be superior to them, but because he is incomprehensible to them. "He flew, he flew" -- a double flight is understood here. First, inasmuch as his fame after the ascension grew throughout the whole world in a short time; hence he says, "upon the wings of the winds," that is, more than feathers that are scattered by the impulse of winds, because in a short time, before three years: Ps. 18: "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth," etc. Because before the destruction of Jerusalem. Or "he flew," etc., ascending into heaven, made invisible, and "he flew" from our sight: Acts 1: "A cloud received him out of their sight." Likewise "he flew upon the wings of the winds," that is, above the knowledge of the angels: Ps. 103: "Who makes his angels spirits," etc. Hence it is said in the Book of Causes (ch. 5) that the first cause is above all narration; and tongues do not fail in narrating it except because they fail in narrating its being, because it is above every cause. And the Commentator says that there is no judgment or cognition of it. "And he made darkness," etc. As was said, the things introduced here to show the wondrous power of God by which David was delivered can be referred to corporeal effects in figure and to spiritual ones in mystery. First, therefore, the Psalmist introduces, according as it is expounded regarding corporeal effects, the excellence of divine power in the air, and this in three ways: namely with respect to winds, with respect to rains and clouds, and with respect to lightning. And since the winds were treated above, we must speak of the rains in the air. According to clouds and rains, therefore, we find a twofold change in the air: one from clear to cloudy, another from cloudy to clear. First, therefore, he sets forth the first change. Second, the second, at "before the brightness." Regarding the first he does three things. First he shows the darkness of cloudy weather. Second, he employs a simile. Third, he sets forth the cause of the darkness. He says therefore, regarding the first: "He made darkness his hiding place." It is said that God dwells in heaven. Hence when the clouds hide the sky, God seems to dwell in concealment: Ezek. 32: "I will cover heaven with a cloud." And he puts the simile of a tent; and therefore he says, "Round about him is his tabernacle." For a tent is set up and taken down, like clouds. He says, "Dark water in the clouds of the air." Next he treats of the second change. "Before the brightness," etc., and he uses this simile: when light comes, darkness is expelled; and thus, when God shows his light, the darkness of the mists flees. And therefore he says, "Before the brightness in his sight the clouds passed away, before the brightness of the light from your face the clouds passed away," just as by the brightness or splendor of the sun clouds flee and melt, as is said in the book of Meteorology. Firebrands are set forth in the passing of the clouds, because hail and lightning, or fire, have a similar cause of generation. The ancients indeed say that they are generated in the highest place, which shows that a stronger congelation is caused by a stronger cold. Hence snow requires more cold than water; rain and hail more than snow; and the cold can be so great that it immediately condenses into hail; sometimes first into water and then into hail. And they say that vapors raised higher are greatly congealed, and therefore large hailstones are generated. But the Philosopher says to the contrary that they would be larger on the mountains and in winter; the contrary of which we see, because they are larger in valleys and occur in spring and autumn, and are generated in a nearby place. Likewise, according to the Philosopher, they sometimes come angular, which is a sign that they come from nearby, for the angles melt more quickly. Hence it should be known that it is natural that an opposite acts more strongly upon its opposite. Now it is certain that in the clouds cold and heat are mixed; therefore when the surrounding heat of the air compresses the cold that it cannot consume, then the cold acts interiorly while the heat surrounds it on the outside. Now falling firebrands have a twofold cause of generation: one through smoke ascending above to the place of inflammation, which is inflamed; and thus according to the inflammation it descends until it finds combustible matter. And he touched on this when he said, "Coals were kindled by him." And here he touches on another mode, which is through contrary resistance. In a cloud there is sometimes something hot, and this is compressed inwardly by the exterior cold and is multiplied, so that it brings along thick matter and falls; and therefore coals, fire, and hail have a similar generation, namely compression of cold or heat, as was said. He says therefore, "Before the brightness in his sight," etc. And these passed away together with the coal and hail, which are generated from clouds, as was said.

[86913] Here he treats of the third change. And first, of thunder. Second, of lightning, at "he sent his arrows." It should be known that the Psalmist speaks here according to this likeness: that whatever happens in the sky is attributed to God. Hence he takes the sound heard in the sky as though it were the voice of God. Now there is a twofold sound in the sky. One is thunder; and this, although some say it is the extinction of fire in a cloud, the Psalmist rejects and says it is produced by the clash of winds -- and so also are the clouds. And therefore the Psalmist says, "The Lord thundered from heaven." Also, sometimes thick clouds from which hailstones are generated sometimes produce a sound; hence the Philosopher says that sometimes before hail there is a crashing of clouds, sometimes not. For just as a hot and dry vapor expelled by the cold, splitting the cloud, makes a sound, as is evident in lightning, so a moist vapor congealed into hail and expelled by the heat splits it to some degree and makes a sound. And therefore he says, "The Most High gave forth his voice," that is, he manifested his power. And there follows, "hail and coals of fire," which are generated from these clouds, as was said. Or thus, "he thundered from heaven." Note that sometimes moist vapor ascends to a higher place; and because it is of the nature of water, moist impressions are made from it, which are fog, dew, haze, rain, hail, snow, and the like. Now these are diversified sometimes by diversity with respect to the thinness and thickness of heat and cold. For sometimes dry vapor ascends; and if it alone ascends, it makes winds; but if that dry vapor is contained in moist vapor, then when the moist vapor ascends upward and begins to thicken because of the cold, the dry vapor enclosed in that moist vapor causes great agitation and is inflamed -- for such vapor is quickly inflamed, as can be seen in vapor that comes from a person's belly -- and this inflammation is the cause of lightning and flashing. Now the dry vapor, agitated in the interior of the clouds, makes a manifold sound. Also, if thus inflamed it strikes the sides of the cloud and does not split it, then it gleams but not clearly, just as if someone were to see some brightness through a cloth; for the cloud is somewhat transparent, hence it is somewhat visible. And it sounds like the sound of a flame in the middle of a fire. Sometimes also, without inflammation and consequently without flashing, there is a sound, as if rumbling; and this happens when it strikes, uninflamed, the sides of the cloud. But if it strikes the sides and splits them, yet with some difficulty, and this in the thicker part of the cloud, then there is a terrible sound, as if someone were tearing a cloth of immense width; and then the appearance of the lightning or flashing is curved, because it does not go straight out of the cloud, as was said. Sometimes it splits the cloud with great force and almost instantly, and all the vapor goes out at once; and then it sounds like an inflated bladder, or as if a blown-up bag were burst over someone's head, and it strikes the air with the strongest percussion. Sometimes that dry vapor increases from inflation and, seeking a larger place, causes the cloud to dissolve suddenly, sounding like green wood crackling in fire, or especially like eggs; and this is most apparent in chestnuts, which, when placed in fire and the moisture begins to be released and seeks a larger place, break the resisting shell and exit with force and a great sound. Sometimes also, unable to exit, it is extinguished; and it sounds like red-hot iron extinguished in water, which sound the Philosopher calls "hissing" or "sizzling." Sometimes also that vapor makes various openings in the thinner parts of the cloud, and then it makes a kind of whistling sound, like wind when it exits through openings. Sometimes before it is kindled it bursts from the cloud, and then it sounds like blacksmith's bellows when they blow.

[86914] "Lightnings." Here he describes the movement of lightnings and compares them to an arrow on account of the vehemence of the wind by which they are moved. "And he scattered them," namely the sinners, who are sometimes moved by them; for according to the diversity of winds there is a diversity of lightning's motion. For just as above, when he was treating the manner of the winds, he said "he flew, he flew," etc., to show the diverse manner of the winds, so here he says "lightnings," etc., to show the diverse motion of lightnings. He says "he disturbed them," because Pliny says (Book 2, ch. 12) that there are auguries according to lightnings, because sometimes it is a good sign, namely when they come from the east; sometimes it is not good; and therefore people taking auguries are disturbed on account of presages of future things.

[86915] "And the fountains appeared." Here he treats of the generation of waters, which emanate from certain sources called springs, from which all generation of waters comes. Now these are generated in two ways. Sometimes from a customary and natural cause: just as vapors are raised above the earth and from this elevation are cooled above and descend and become rains, so also from the interior heat of the earth, when vapors do not exit, they collect and are resolved into water and become springs of water. Just as rains are generated in the air, so springs are generated in the earth; and therefore around mountains from which vapors do not exit, springs arise. And this is what he says, "The fountains of waters appeared." Sometimes springs are generated from the subversion of the earth by an earthquake, from whose disturbance veins of water submerged in the depths of the earth appear; and therefore he says, "And the foundations of the world were revealed." The Philosopher says: subversion is from wind enclosed within, just as wind in the air stirs up the air. But when wind is retained, there is an earthquake; and both kinds of wind seem to be the wrath of God. And therefore he says they were made through the earth, as in an earthquake. Mystically, according to spiritual effects: and just as above the mystery of the incarnation was shown, signifying the incarnation itself through which he descended and the ascension, so here are designated the things that followed after. First, therefore, he shows his concealment. Second, the gathering of the Church, at "round about him." Third, the preaching of the apostles, at "dark water." Regarding the first he says, "He made darkness." The Gloss distinguishes darkness in four ways. First, his humanity: Ezek. 32: "I will cover the sun with a cloud." Is. 45: "Truly you are a hidden God." Second, the sacramental species, such as Baptism and the other sacraments, in which divine power operates secretly. Third, he was hidden in the faith of the faithful: 2 Cor. 5: "While we are in the body, we are pilgrims from the Lord." Fourth, he works secretly through the wicked, who are darkness: Jn. 1: "The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it." Sometimes the wicked are permitted to do something against the saints; but while these darknesses exist, "his tabernacle," that is, the Church, "is round about him": Ps. 45: "The Most High has sanctified his tabernacle." Rev. 21: "Behold the tabernacle of God with men," etc., through faith and charity, inasmuch as they cling to him as a mediator, who favors them equally, as the Gloss says. "Dark water in the clouds of the air." Here he treats of the preaching of the apostles. And first he sets forth the quality of the preaching. Second, the condition of the preachers, at "clouds." Third, the effect of the preaching, "the fountains of waters appeared." He says therefore, "dark water," that is, doctrine, "in clouds," that is, in the prophets and preachers. He calls them clouds because, raised up from earthly things, they rain down the word of God from the clouds: Is. 60: "Who are these that fly as clouds?" etc. And Is. 45: "Drop down dew, you heavens, from above, and let the clouds rain the just one." Or he says, "in clouds of the air," that is, apostles raised up from the earth: Is. 5: "I will command the clouds not to rain upon it." And the apostles are called dark water in comparison to the brightness, that is, Christ, who will appear to those seeing him: 1 Cor. 13: "We see now through a mirror in an enigma, but then face to face." Or otherwise, and thus it should be punctuated: "Dark water in the clouds of the air; before the brightness in his sight the clouds passed away"; then follows "hail and coals of fire," etc. And a twofold doctrine is distinguished: namely that of the prophets, and this is obscure, because it has a veil, as is said in 2 Cor. 3: "Until this present day the same veil remains in the reading of the Old Testament, not being lifted, because it is made void in Christ." Therefore it is said, "dark water in the prophets," that is, doctrine. But the doctrine of the New Testament is clear; and therefore he says, "before the brightness"; the whole is one phrase, that is, bright, because, as is said in Eph. 3: "In other generations it was not known." Ps. 147: "He has not done in like manner to every nation." Next he treats of the teachers themselves, and they are compared to clouds, arrows, and lightnings: to clouds as preachers. And he says three things. First, their passing; "clouds." The quality of their preaching: "hail and coals of fire." The authority of their preaching: "he thundered." "Clouds," that is, the apostles, "passed away," from the Jews to the Gentiles: Job 37: "The clouds spread their light, which wander about wherever the will of him who governs them shall lead them." Acts 13: "It was necessary that the word of God should first be spoken to you, but because," etc. Hail harms fruits and flowers greatly, and their preaching was like the hail of threats. "And coals of fire," that is, words that inflame. And the authority, because the Lord spoke through them. Hence, "The Lord thundered from heaven," that is, to the apostles themselves he thundered words of threat. Mt. 10: "For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you," etc. "And the Most High gave forth his voice," namely of gentleness, inflaming: Jas. 1: "In meekness receive the implanted word," etc. And the first follows from the word "hail," and from the second, "coals of fire." Or otherwise: "he thundered" over Christ: Jn. 12: "A voice came from heaven saying, 'I have both glorified and will glorify again.' The crowd that stood by and heard said that it had thundered." "And the Most High gave forth his voice" in the transfiguration. Lk. 3: "This is my beloved Son." "He sent his arrows." Here these teachers are compared to arrows on account of the fervor of the Holy Spirit in them: Is. 49: "He has made me like a chosen arrow." And Is. 27: "Those who will come forth with force from Jacob and fill the face of the world with seed." "And he scattered them," because to some they were the fragrance of life unto life, to others the fragrance of death unto death. 2 Cor. 2. "He multiplied lightnings." He says this on account of the clarity of the miracles: Job 38: "Will you send lightnings, and they will go, and returning will say to you, 'Here we are'?" "And he disturbed them," that is, he made them marvel. In Acts 3 it is said of Peter's miracle that they were all filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened. "The fountains appeared." Here the effect of the preaching is set forth. And first the effect is set forth. Second, the principle, "from your rebuke." And there is a twofold effect. One is shown when he says, "The fountains of waters appeared," that is, the teachings of wisdom: Is. 41: "I will open rivers on the bare heights and fountains in the midst of the plains; I will turn the desert into pools of water, and the pathless land into streams of water." Also Is. 12: "You shall draw waters with joy from the fountains of the savior." Or the gifts of the Holy Spirit: Zech. 13: "There shall be a fountain open to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for the washing of the sinner and of the unclean." The other effect is set forth when he says, "The foundations were revealed," namely the holy patriarchs, upon whom our faith is founded, because what was said or done figuratively in them was revealed through the apostles. Now the beginning of these things is when Christ began to rebuke: Mt. 4: "Do penance, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand," etc. Lk. 13: "Unless you do penance, you shall all likewise perish." "From the breath of the spirit of your wrath," when he inspired that we should all be troubled against sins.

[86916] "He sent." Above the Psalmist treated the power of the deliverer; here he pursues in order the benefit of deliverance. And regarding this he does two things. First he gives thanks for deliverance regarding past things. Second, regarding future things that he hopes for, at "and I shall be spotless with him." Regarding the first he sets forth three things. First he narrates from what he was delivered. Second, the deliverance itself, at "and he became." Third, the cause of deliverance, at "he saved me." Regarding the first he does two things. First he shows himself delivered from great tribulations. Second, he explains how the tribulations were great, at "he rescued me." The Gloss says according to the letter, "he sent from on high"; as if to say: God is powerful, because he does all the aforesaid things, namely moving, etc., thundering, etc., having supreme power. "And this from on high," namely by his power, "he took me," snatching me away, "and received me," that is, raised me up, protecting me "from many waters," that is, from many tribulations. Ps. 33: "Many are the tribulations of the just, and from all of them," etc. Sir. 51: "You delivered me from the gates of tribulations that surrounded me, and from the pressure of the flame that surrounded me." Mystically, God sent his own Son "from on high," that is, from heaven: Jn. 6: "I descended from heaven, not to do my own will," etc. This is what was asked: Ps. 143: "Send forth your hand from on high." "And he delivered me from many waters." Ps. 18: "From the highest heaven is his going forth," etc. Or the Holy Spirit: Lam. 1: "From on high he sent fire." "And he took me," the infirm, to heal me. "And he received me from many waters," namely of Baptism, or from the multitude of sins. Or "he sent from on high," that is, his grace to just men: Jas. 1: "Every good gift," etc. "And he took me" to repentance: Is. 40: "Like a shepherd he will feed his flock, with his arm he will gather the lambs," etc. Hos. 11: "I was like a nurse to Ephraim, I carried them in my arms." Or of the peoples, because the faithful were taken from the multitude of the nations.

[86917] "He rescued me." Here he proves how the tribulations are many. And first from the condition of the enemies. Second, from their persecution, at "because they were strengthened." The condition of the enemies is very harmful, because they are powerful and hating; hence, "he rescued me from my most powerful enemies and from those who hated me." The powerful ones mystically are carnal sins: Sir. 18: "If you give your soul its desires, it will make you a joy to your enemies." Is. 49: "Shall the prey be taken from the strong?" Those who hate are the demons. Ex. 1: "The Egyptians hated the children of Israel." Ps. 88: "I will strike his enemies before his face," etc. Next the persecution is set forth. A person can be freed from enemies in two ways: either by not allowing himself to be conquered, or by fleeing. But he excludes both from himself. First, because they were strong and strengthened, that is, multiplied, and overcame him, nor could he flee; and this is what he says, "they anticipated me," blocking the way to flee: Lam. 4: "Our persecutors were swifter than the eagles of heaven; they pursued us over the mountains." And this "in the day of affliction," because a person is weaker when he is afflicted: Lam. 1: "All her persecutors overtook her in the midst of her straits." He sets forth the double help of the deliverer. First against prevailing enemies; hence he says, "and the Lord became my protector," so that they may not harm me: Ps. 63: "You have protected me from the assembly of the malignant," etc. Second, against the cunning; hence there follows, "he brought me forth into a broad place," out of the narrow place in which I was, not knowing what to do, giving me ways to know what to do. Or into the breadth of charity: Ps. 118: "Your commandment is exceedingly broad." The cause of deliverance is twofold: namely divine grace and human merit. Hence he says, "he saved me because he willed me." This is the most powerful cause of deliverance, namely his will: Eph. 1: "Who works all things according to the counsel of his will." And yet subsequently some human merit cooperates there: 1 Cor. 15: "The grace of God in me was not in vain." And therefore he adds, "The Lord will reward me," etc. Where he does three things. First he proposes the merit. Second, in what it consists. Third, he sets forth the way of arriving at this merit. The second, at "because I kept," etc. The third, at "because all his judgments." Human merit consists in two things: namely in doing good and in avoiding evil: Ps. 33: "Turn away from evil and do good." And therefore regarding the first he says, "The Lord will reward me according to my justice," which he himself worked in me: Wis. 3: "The souls of the just are in the hand of God, and the torment of malice shall not touch them," etc. Prov. 11: "To him who sows justice, there is a faithful reward." Regarding the second he says, "according to the cleanness of my hands he will reward me," that is, innocence: Job 22: "The innocent shall be saved, and he shall be saved by the cleanness of his hands." "He shall not be deprived of good things," etc. Ps. 83. Now this justice consists in observing the ways of God: Ps. 118: "I have run the way of your commandments." And therefore he says, "because I kept the ways of the Lord": Job 23: "My foot has followed his steps; I have kept his way and have not turned aside from it." "And because I have not acted wickedly," departing from God, because through sin a person departs from God and is defiled: Ps. 43: "Our heart has not turned back." How did he arrive at this? Because "all his judgments are in my sight." It avails greatly for doing good and avoiding evil to think upon divine judgments: Job 19: "Flee from the face of the sword, because the sword is the avenger of iniquities." "And I kept this, because I did not push away his statutes from me," deliberately sinning: Job 21: "They said to God, 'Depart from us.'" And there follows: "a flood shall come upon them." He who sins from weakness or ignorance easily obtains pardon.

[86918] "And I shall be." Above the Psalmist commemorated the benefit of deliverance regarding the past; here regarding the future, as to hope. And first he commemorates the benefits in general. Second, in particular those he has received and those he hopes for, at "my God, his way is undefiled." Third, he commends divine justice. Regarding the first he does two things. First he proposes a prayer to God. Second, he commends the hope of being heard, at "for you light my lamp." He proposes three things. First, the resolution to persevere in innocence. Second, the merit of retribution. Third, he assigns the reason. The second, at "he will reward." The third, at "with the holy one you will be holy." He says therefore, "And I shall be spotless with him," that is, I will cling to God, because he speaks in the person of himself and of others, some of whom are innocent; and therefore he says, "and I shall be," that is, I will stand and persevere in innocence: Sir. 31: "Blessed is the man who is found without blemish." Or "I shall be spotless with him," that is, I will cling to God: 1 Cor. 6: "He who clings to God is one spirit," etc., keeping yourself from every stain: Job 27: "Until I die I will not depart from my innocence." Some are penitents, and what pertains to them is that they not fall again into sin (and therefore he says, "and I will guard myself from my iniquity"), like a dog that returns to its vomit and a sow that was washed to wallowing in the mud (2 Pet. 2). Sir. 26: "My heart has been saddened over two things, and the third brings anger upon me: a man of war failing through poverty, and a man of understanding despised, and he who passes from justice to sin -- God has prepared him for the sword." Next he sets forth the hope of retribution when he says, "And the Lord will reward me according to my justice." And there is a twofold retribution. One that is given for goods fulfilled; and for this he says, "The Lord will reward me according to my justice." Anselm says: justice is the rectitude of will preserved for its own sake. Or according to a person's works he will render to him: Ps. 62: "He will render to each one according to his works." He says "I will guard myself" and "he will reward," because if a person was at one time just and did works of justice but does not guard himself from sins, or does not preserve himself in works of justice, therefore his merit is dead and he does not deserve retribution: Ezek. 18: "All his justices shall not be remembered." The other retribution is given for benefits; hence he says, "He will reward according to the cleanness of my hands in the sight of his eyes." Sometimes people have only outwardly clean hands, that is, pure works, and to those God will not give a reward; but when they have pure works in the heart, then he will reward. And this is "in the sight of his eyes," not those goods that are in our sight, but in the sight of God: Is. 64: "Eye has not seen, O God, apart from you." And what will he reward? Ineffable joy and an increase of grace, which come from keeping the commandments of God: Ps. 18: "In keeping them there is a great reward." "And he will reward according to the cleanness of my hands," that is, of my works. Now a work is called impure by reason of carnal affection: Is. 1: "Your hands are full of blood." Also by reason of vainglory: Mt. 6: "Take heed that you do not do your justice before men, to be seen by them; otherwise you shall not have a reward." Gregory says: it is great folly to act and to gape for praise, when by the very thing by which one could have purchased heaven, one seeks instead a vain and passing word.

[86919] Next the reason for retribution is set forth; therefore there follows, "With the holy one." Regarding this he does two things. First he sets forth the reason for retribution. Second, he expounds it, at "for you will save the humble people." The first two verses can be understood in two ways. In one way, as speaking to God; and thus the literal sense is, as if to say: You, O Lord, "with the holy one will be holy." And thus he says two things: namely that God is the rewarder and approver of the good. Second, how he is the reprover of the wicked; hence there follows, "and with the innocent," etc. "And with the perverse you will be perverse." Now it should be known that he names the holy, the innocent, and the elect. "Elect" can be understood in two ways. In one way, by God; and this is common to all the saints: Eph. 1: "God chose us before the foundation of the world," etc. In another way, one is called elect who has an excellence of innocence and holiness: Song 5: "My beloved is white and ruddy, chosen out of thousands." If "elect" is taken in the first way, then the second is set forth on our part, and the third on God's part. If in the second way, then he proposes two things that are on our part. The first is the doing of good, which is done for God's sake; and this properly has the character of holiness, because all things that are ordered to God are called holy; and this is what he says: Lord, "you will be holy with the holy one," causing holiness in him: Lev. 21: "I am the God who sanctifies you." Or thus: "You will be holy" effectively, that is, showing that you love and approve holiness. For he does not show himself except through works; for we do not see his substance. Nor is he holy with the holy one in any other way than by showing holiness; for he is not now visible to us, so that we might say he conforms himself to the holy one in outward motions, as a person conforms himself in various ways to various people, especially friends, because every animal loves its like; and what one loves, one rewards. Hence, showing yourself holy, when will you reward, he asks, the works of holiness? "And with the innocent man you will be innocent," effectively and by rewarding. "And with the elect," whom you love, "you will be elect," because you will cause him to choose you: Jn. 15: "You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you" originally. Deut. 4: "He loved your fathers and chose their seed after them." And Deut. 26: "You have chosen the Lord today, that he may be your God, and that you may obey his command; and the Lord has chosen you today, that you may be his special people, and he will make you higher than all the nations, that you may be a holy people." Or "elect," that is, excellently set apart. "And with the perverse you will be perverse," that is, you will permit him to be perverse. Or the perverse are those who do not follow those whom they ought to follow. Therefore he who does not follow the will of God seems perverse. Therefore you act against the will of God, and God acts against your will; as if to say: you want to have blessedness, and God will give misery: Lev. 26: "If you walk contrary to me, I also will walk against you, and I will strike you seven times for your sins." And therefore he says, "with the perverse you will be perverse," that is, acting against the will of the perverse. In another way it can be read as referring the discourse to some person: and thus a person "with a holy person," or with Christ, "will be holy," because you will hear nothing from God except holiness. Sir. 37: "With a religious man, discuss holiness." "And with the innocent you will be innocent," because morals are formed according to one's company: 1 Cor. 15: "Evil conversations corrupt good morals." "And with the perverse you will be perverted." Sir. 13: "He who touches pitch shall be defiled by it, and he who associates with the proud," etc. Next he expounds the foregoing according to the first reading. Why will you, O Lord, be holy with the holy one? Because "you will save the humble people," that is, in this -- that you will save the humble -- you show yourself to be holy with the holy one: Jas. 4: "To the humble he gives grace." Mt. 19: "Let the little children come to me, for of such is the kingdom of heaven." Ps. 137: "The Lord is exalted, and he looks upon the lowly." Why will you be perverse with the perverse? Because "you will humble the eyes of the proud": Lk. 14: "Everyone who exalts himself shall be humbled." Is. 2: "The lofty eyes shall be brought low, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down." And he says "eyes," because pride consists in this: that a person raises his gaze to things greater than his capacity: Is. 16: "His pride and his arrogance are greater than his strength." And therefore Ps. 130: "Lord, my heart is not exalted, nor are my eyes lifted up."

[86920] "For you." Here he turns to prayer, as if to say: so just are you. "For you light my lamp." And he does two things. First he gives thanks for a benefit received. Second, he sets forth a petition for one to be received, at "O my God, enlighten my darkness." He says therefore, "You light," etc. This whole passage can be expounded literally in two ways: so that by "lamp" is understood prosperity, and by "darkness" is understood adversity. Just as when a person is joyful, all things seem bright to him; when he is sad, all things seem darkened to him. This therefore is what he says: "For you light my lamp, O Lord," because you have given me prosperity and continually give it. "Enlighten my darkness," that is, if any adversity remains in me, expel it and remove it from me. In another way it can be understood morally, so that by "lamp" is understood the mind or soul of a person: Prov. 20: "The lamp of the Lord is the spirit of man." Therefore the mind of a person is like a lamp of God lit by divine light: Ps. 4: "The light of your countenance is signed upon us," etc. As long as we are without sin, our lamp is lit, that is, our soul shines with the light of grace; but when some darkness of the corruptible flesh remains, it is extinguished: Rom. 7: "I myself with the mind serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin." And this is what he says: "For you light my lamp," that is, because my soul is illuminated by the light of grace. "Enlighten my darkness," that is, remove from me the defects and corruptions through which a person falls into darkness. Or it can be read allegorically, so that the words are said as from the person of Christ or of any just man. In the Church there are many who shine, like the faithful and the saints: Phil. 2: "Among whom you shine as lights in the world, holding the word of life." Also many who are dark, like the unfaithful and sinners: Eph. 5: "You were once darkness," etc. Therefore a person praying for the Church, or the Church for herself, says, "For you light my lamp," that is, the faithful who shine; "enlighten the darkness," that is, the sinners.

[86921] He sets forth his hope of being heard when he says, "for." Here he does two things. First he touches on deliverance from evil. Second, victory over evil. He says therefore: I pray because I hope "in you," that is, in your power, "I shall be delivered from temptation," that is, from whatever tribulation or attack: 1 Cor. 10: "God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you are able." "And in my God I shall leap over the wall," that is, I shall have victory over sin by the power of God. For then the enemy has victory over a city when he leaps over the wall. This wall is whatever difficulty impedes us from doing good, or the sins that provoke us to doing evil. Jerome says, "I shall break down the wall," because we cannot be in the world without sin: 1 Jn. 1: "If we say that we have no sin," etc. But we leap over it, because we overcome it when we do not consent to its desires.

[86922] There follows, "God." Above he commemorated in general the benefits he expects from God in the future, namely "in you I shall be delivered," etc.; here he pursues them in particular. And it should be noted that he speaks in the manner of one who has adversity and adversaries from whom he hopes for victory; in which there is a threefold degree. First, that he may pursue his fleeing adversaries and destroy them as captives. Second, that he may reign over them, at "and you have girded me." Third, that he may be exalted, at "and you will deliver me." Regarding the first he does three things. First he commends his helper, namely God. Second, he shows how God has already given him certain things by which he is fit to pursue them. Third, he treats of the pursuit. The second, at "God who has girded me." The third, at "I will pursue." The first is divided into two. First he commends God. Second, he proves the commendation, at "for who is God." He therefore commends God for three things: that he is just in deed, true in word, and that he is merciful in coming to aid. Regarding the first he says: I shall be delivered from temptation, while I consider the purity of divine justice, because "my God, his way is undefiled." Again, while I consider his ordering of things, because nothing unjust is in him: Ezek. 18: "Is not my way right, and are not your ways rather crooked?" Or the way of God by which God goes to the soul is undefiled. And this is charity: 1 Cor. 12: "I show you a still more excellent way," that is, so that you may go securely. This is undefiled, because "charity does not deal perversely," that is, crookedly. Or God's way is Christ himself, because "he committed no sin": Is. 35: "It shall be called the holy way, and the unclean shall not pass over it; and this shall be unto you a straight way, so that fools shall not err therein." Or the way of Christ is the Blessed Virgin: Ps. 76: "In the sea is your way" -- this is undefiled: Song 4: "You are all beautiful, my love," etc. Is. 54: "Enlarge the place of your tent." Regarding the second he says, "the words of the Lord." And he speaks in the likeness of gold and silver, which, if pure, is tested by fire. Hence just as gold purified by fire has no impurity, so are the words of the Lord purified: Prov. 8: "All my words are just, and there is nothing crooked or perverse in them," etc. "Tested by fire": Ps. 11: "The words of the Lord are chaste words, silver," etc. And they are said to be "tested by fire," namely of the Holy Spirit: Job 12: "The ear tries words, and the palate of him who eats discerns flavor." No one can test the words unless he has the fire of the Holy Spirit: 1 Cor. 2: "The natural man does not perceive the things that are of the Spirit of God." But because he is true, he will fulfill what he has promised. And for this reason he says, "he is the protector of all who hope in him": Sir. 2: "Who has hoped in the Lord and been confounded?" Next he proves the commendation: because these are his properties -- that he is just, that he is true, and that he is merciful. If therefore these rightly belong to my God, do not seek another. But there is no other God besides him. And therefore he says, "Who is God besides the Lord?" As if to say: no one. Is. 42: "I am the Lord; this is my name." Deut. 6: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord your God is one." In this the Jews differed from others. And because others worshipped the elements of the world, or men, or angels, and these were called their makers; but the Jews worshipped the true God, their maker. He says therefore that he is the God of all creation. Second, that he was specially worshipped by the Jews. He says therefore, regarding the first, "Who is God besides the Lord," namely the maker of all creation? Jdt. 16: "Let every creature serve you." "Or who is God besides our God," specially? 1 Sam. 2: "There is none holy as the Lord, for there is no other besides you, and there is none strong like our God." Ps. 75: "In Judah God is known," etc. He is called "ours" specially by devotion, and worship, and the union of nature, and the assumption of flesh, and redemption. In this the Manicheans are confounded, because he is the God and Lord of visible things, and because the God of the Old Testament is the true God, since there is no God besides him.

[86923] "God." Here he shows how he has fitness for conquering from God, for God sometimes gives someone the power to act well; nor does it suffice unless God protects him outwardly. First, therefore, he shows how God gave power inwardly. Second, how he helps outwardly, at "you have given me the shield of salvation." Three things are necessary for someone to conquer: namely that he be strong: Prov. 31: "Strength and beauty are her clothing." Lk. 11: "When a strong man armed guards his court." That he be agile, and that he be trained in battle; and he says he has these three things. The second, at "who makes my feet perfect." The third, at "who teaches my hands." Regarding the first he does two things. First he confesses that strength was given him by God. Second, the proper use of strength. He says therefore, "God who has girded me with strength for battle," etc. The aforesaid soldiers are girded with arms and a sword so that they may be ready and prepared for combat: 1 Mac. 3: "Judas Maccabeus put on his breastplate like a giant and girded on his military weapons in battle." This is the strength, namely the power that was given me by God, not only in bodily wars but also in spiritual ones, which I would not win without God's power. And therefore he says, "he girded me with strength": Eph. 6: "Be strengthened in the Lord and in the might of his power." Is. 40: "He gives strength to the weary, and to those who are not, he multiplies fortitude and vigor." Or "he girded me" in the manner of a runner, lest he be impeded by the flowing of his garments. Thus the power of God holds back the affection lest it flow toward earthly things. And therefore there follows, "and he made my way spotless": 1 Sam. 25: "Blessed be God, who kept his servant from evil." Ps. 118: "Blessed are the undefiled in the way." Or this way is the way of charity, which does not deal perversely, as was said above.

[86924] "Who." Here agility is set forth, which is necessary for fighting. 1 Sam. 24 says that Saul went out against David over the most precipitous rocks, which are passable only by deer; as if to say: God conferred such agility upon me that I went like a deer over the mountains. "And upon the heights he has set me." On steep mountains human footsteps are not firmly planted, but God gave him such grace that he did not slip on them. Mystically it is read thus: a deer crosses thorns and forests without injury; so the spiritual affection passes through without injury and infection from evil things and the pleasures of the world: Gen. 49: "Naphtali is a deer let loose, giving beautiful words." Is. 35: "Then the lame shall leap like a deer." "And upon the heights he has set me," that is, he has fixed my mind upon heavenly things: Hab. 3: "Upon my high places the conqueror will lead me." Next military training is set forth; hence he says, "who teaches my hands for battle." Military training is acquired through knowledge and perfected through exercise. First, therefore, he seeks knowledge or training, because this training is necessary for soldiers. Prov. 24: "War is begun with planning." But this one, taught by God, says regarding the second, "you have made my arms like a bow of bronze," that is, you have given me arms that are, as it were, indefatigable for fighting. Or "who teaches," etc., that is, against vices and demons, he teaches us to work to overcome enemies who try to close the gates of heaven. Then, changing the person, he says, "you have made," etc. Another reading has, "you have broken the bow of bronze," that is, my arm. Ps. 143: "Blessed be the Lord my God, who teaches my hands to fight," etc. Note that the excellence of agility and the excellence of strength are found in lions, which from excessive dryness have no marrow in their bones; and these things occur from a great inequality of the mixed elements, and therefore they live a short time; and this is not fitting in a person on account of his activities. Hence such things are said to have been given to David as a special gift, as is said in Sir. 47: "He played with lions as with lambs, and with bears he did likewise as with their lambs." And similarly, the skill of fighting was given to him by God through grace, mystically. We must be trained in spiritual warfare. Sir. 11: "Many are the snares of the deceitful," which we cannot escape unless we have both training and divine help. Job 39: "The glory of his nostrils," that is, the demon's, "is terror; he despises fear and does not yield to the sword." 2 Cor. 4: "Although he who is our outward man is corrupted, yet he who is the inward man is renewed day by day."

[86925] "And you have given." Here he shows how the aforesaid things given to him are preserved by God outwardly; hence he says, "you girded me with strength," and yet "he protects me; and you have given me the shield of your salvation," that is, you have protected me for salvation, because the aforesaid things do not suffice unless the protection of God is present. Ps. 63: "You have protected me, O God, from the assembly of the malignant," etc. "And your right hand has upheld me," that is, the favor of your grace strengthened me in battle. Of this battle, Ezek. 3: "The hand of the Lord was with me, strengthening me." Or "your right hand," that is, your Son, "has upheld me," that is, has assumed my nature. Or "me," the weak one, to heal me. "And your discipline has corrected me unto the end," that is, finally and perfectly. Prov. 3: "Whom the Lord loves he corrects and chastises, and as a father he takes delight in his son." Hence "your discipline has corrected me unto the end." Regarding the second he says, "discipline," etc. It sometimes happens that someone doubts, and sometimes errs. But that one, namely God, corrects errors; hence "your discipline has corrected me unto the end," as was said above. Likewise, he directs the doubtful: "and your discipline itself will teach me." Ps. 118: "Teach me goodness and discipline and knowledge." Regarding the third he says, "You have enlarged my steps beneath me," as if giving agility, and in it he fosters those who have wide steps when they are not constricted. Or spiritually, when the heart is prompt through charity toward the good. Ps. 118: "I have run the way of your commandments when you enlarged my heart." "And my footsteps have not been weakened," because he does not fail. Or "footsteps," that is, the signs that are left along the way.

[86926] "I will pursue." Above the Psalmist set forth his fitness for conquering; here he treats of the victory, how he pursued those who fled. And regarding this he does two things. First he sets forth the manner of pursuit; second, he shows the inability to resist, at "I will break them, and they shall not be able to stand." Regarding the first he does three things. First he shows the pursuit to be just; second, effective; third, persevering. Just, when he says, "I will pursue my enemies" -- not friends, but enemies. 1 Mac. 3: "Judas pursued the enemies, searching them out, and those who troubled his people he burned with flames." But it does not seem that it is lawful for good men to persecute others. Gal. 4: "As then he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the spirit, so also now." Therefore it belongs to carnal people to inflict persecution, and to spiritual people to suffer it. But it should be said that the motive for pursuing distinguishes the kind of persecution. For some pursue out of love and zeal. Ps. 68: "The zeal of your house has consumed me"; and they do this in order to lead others to the good or to salvation, or to prevent evil. Ps. 100: "Him who secretly slandered his neighbor, I pursued"; and in this way the good pursue the wicked or sinners. Some pursue out of hatred, inflicting evil and impeding good; and in this way the wicked, or carnal people, pursue just men. Ps. 70: "Pursue and seize him," etc. Or "I will pursue my enemies," that is, carnal affections; "I will overtake them," they will not overtake me, according to the Gloss. And he shows how he is effective in pursuing enemies; hence he says, "and I will overtake them." Then the pursuit is shown effective when one reaches the end so as to capture them. 2 Sam. 5: "Shall I go up against the Philistines, and will you give them into my hand? And the Lord said to David, 'Go up,'" etc. And above: "He went on advancing and growing, and the Lord God of hosts was with him." Likewise he shows how the pursuit is persevering, because "I will not turn back," namely from the pursuit of the unjust, "until they fail," that is, until they are consumed. 2 Sam. 1: "The arrow of Jonathan never turned back." Morally, our enemies are the movements of desire that are in us and wage continual wars. Rom. 7: "I see another law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind," etc. We must pursue and overtake and bind these, dominate them and restrain them. "And I will not turn back," that is, I will not cease to pursue, "until they fail" in their rebellion. 2 Sam. 8: "David struck the Philistines and humbled them." But these do not fail in this life; for although they are always diminished, they are never totally eradicated. Ex. 15: "I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them." Allegorically it is said of Christ, who pursues our enemies, the Jews and other sinners, punishing them bodily and spiritually.

[86927] "I will break them." Here he excludes their power of resisting; as if to say: they will not resist me, because "I will break them," that is, I will so diminish their forces that "they shall not be able to stand." Ps. 35: "All the workers of iniquity have fallen; they were cast out and could not stand." Job 38: "The exalted arm shall be broken," that is, they will not endure against me, or they will not be able to resist. Lev. 26: "You shall pursue your enemies, and they shall fall before you." And this is so because they will come into my power; and this is what he says, "They shall fall beneath my feet." We also ought to do this concerning evil movements and sins and demons. Mal. 4: "You shall trample the wicked when they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet." Lk. 10: "Behold, I have given you power to tread upon serpents and upon all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall hurt you." Gen. 4: "Its desire shall be under you, and you shall have dominion over it."

[86928] And all this is because "you have girded me." Here he treats of their total abandonment, and he commemorates two things. First, the divine benefit; second, their final destruction, at "and I will grind them," etc. And because the things he has said seem to pertain to his own glory, he therefore attributes them to God. And first he excludes his own power; second, he shows the dejection of the enemies, "you have overthrown"; third, their being deprived of help, at "they cried out." He says therefore: O Lord, you did this for me, "and you have girded me with strength for battle," that is, all the strength I have for fighting is from you, not from me. Is. 40: "He gives power to the faint, and to those who have no might he increases strength and vigor." "And you have overthrown those who rose up against me beneath me." He sets forth the dejection of the enemies, concerning which he said three things: namely flight, "you gave me their back"; diminishment, "I will break them"; and their fall, because "they shall fall"; and he attributes this to God, not in the same order. First he sets forth the fall of his enemies; as if to say: my enemies shall fall beneath me. Is. 40: "Youths shall faint and labor, and young men shall fall in their infirmity." But you did this: "and you have overthrown those who rose up against me beneath me," that is, you took away their power so that they could not resist me. Lev. 26: "Five of you shall pursue a hundred strangers." Second he sets forth the flight of the enemies: "and you have given me the backs of my enemies." Is. 45: "I will turn the backs of kings." Third he treats of the breaking: "and those who hated me you have destroyed," among the nations they did not know. "They cried out." Here he shows that they are completely desolate; hence he says, "they cried out, and there was none to save them," because they had neither the help of men nor of the gods whom they themselves called the creators of things. Jer. 2: "Where are your gods that you have made? Let them arise and deliver you in the time of your affliction." Hence there follows: "They cried out to the Lord, and he did not hear them." Is. 1: "When you multiply your prayers, I will not hear you." But against this: Is. 65: "Before they cry, I will hear." Ps. 90: "He shall cry to me, and I will hear him." And it should be said that when someone cries out with a right intention, whether praying or crying, then he is heard, and God approves and hears his prayer. Jn. 9: "If anyone is a worshipper of God," that is, with a right intention, "him he hears." But when someone cries out to God with a simulated and feigned prayer, he does not hear. Jas. 4: "You ask and do not receive, because you ask wrongly," that is, with a bad intention or an unjust request. Prov. 1: "Then they will call and I will not hear; they will rise at dawn and will not find me." Next he shows their total destruction; hence he says, "and I will grind them." When dust is thrown, no trace remains, because the wind scatters it; so when the wicked are destroyed, they remain in no way. Therefore he says, "and I will grind them like dust before the wind." Ps. 1: "The wicked are like dust which the wind casts from the face of the earth," that is, they are scattered. Ps. 9: "Their memory has perished," etc. But because some are destroyed sometimes with honor, he shows that the wicked or sinners are consumed vilely and dishonorably; hence he says, "like the mud of the streets I will destroy them." Job 20: "If his pride," namely the sinner's, "ascend even to heaven, and his head touch the clouds, he shall be destroyed in the end like a dunghill." Ps. 68: "Let them be blotted out of the book of the living." Is. 17: "He shall be carried away like the dust of the mountains before the wind" (namely the sinner) "and like a whirlwind before a tempest." Job 13: "Your necks shall be brought down to the mud."

[86929] "You will deliver me." Above the Psalmist commemorated the persecution of his enemies and their total destruction; here he commemorates his own exaltation, by which he was promoted to be king. And regarding this he does two things. First he sets forth his exaltation; second, his thanksgiving, at "the Lord lives." Regarding the first he does two things. First he proposes his exaltation over the Jews; second, he sets forth the devotion of the Gentiles, at "the people"; third, the obstinacy of the Jews, at "alien sons." This pertains more especially to Christ than to David. And therefore regarding this he does two things. First he shows how he is freed from the contradiction of the Jews; second, how power is given him over the nations. He says therefore: not only have you destroyed those who hated me, but "you have delivered me from the contradictions of the people." If this is understood of David, the Jews greatly contradicted him. 2 Sam. 20: "We have no part in David, nor inheritance in the son of Jesse. Return to your tents, O Israel." And they also contradicted Christ, as is clear in the Gospel. Heb. 12: "Think on him who endured such contradiction against himself," etc. And from this both David and Christ were delivered. "You will set me as the head of nations"; as if to say: the Jews do not want me to rule over them, but you have made me lord of both the Jews and the Gentiles. And this especially befits Christ, as is said in Eph. 1: "He gave him as head over all the Church, which is his body." Then the devout submission of the Gentiles is set forth; hence he says, "A people I did not know has served me" -- a foreign people, such as the Ishmaelites and the Moabites, who, as is related in 2 Sam. 8, were made his tributaries. Similarly also to Christ, because those he did not know by visiting them bodily served and obeyed him. Mt. 15: "I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel," namely to visit bodily. Or "I did not know," that is, I did not approve by giving them the law and the prophets. Is. 55: "Behold, you shall call a nation you did not know, and the nations that did not know you shall run to you." "At the hearing of the ear they obeyed me," because although they do not see me, from the mere hearing of faith through the apostles they obeyed. Is. 65: "They have found me who did not seek me." Rom. 10: "Faith comes from hearing." Or "at the hearing of the ear they obeyed me," because immediately upon hearing, as is said in Mt. 4, leaving all things they followed him.

[86930] "Alien sons." Here the obstinacy of the Jews is set forth. And he calls them alien sons, because once they were sons begotten by God through the grace and teaching of the law. Ex. 4: "Israel is my firstborn son." But nevertheless they became strangers. Is. 1: "I have nourished and brought up children." And there follows, "they have turned away backward." And they are aliens for a threefold reason: because "they have lied to me," because "they have grown old," and because "they have limped." A person becomes estranged from God when he does not keep faith; and regarding this he says, "they have lied to me," that is, they have broken the covenant. Also, when they do not follow in the footsteps of the faithful fathers; hence, "they have grown old." A thing that has grown old is near its end. These were new from the beginning. 1 Chr. 12, when they say: "We are yours, O David, and with you, O son of Jesse." But gradually they grew tepid. Another kind of estrangement is when one totally departs; hence he says, "they have limped from their paths," as if lame in one foot, keeping the Old Testament poorly and rejecting the New. Or if it is referred to Christ: "alien sons have lied to me," because they made a covenant with God: Ex. 24: "All that God has spoken, we will do." Afterward they broke it: Ps. 65: "Your enemies shall lie to you in the multitude of your strength." Also the virtue that was in the fathers is not in the sons; therefore "they have grown old": Bar. 3: "Why is it, O Israel, that you are in the land of your enemies and have grown old in a foreign land?" Also "they have limped from their paths," that is, from the precepts of the law, because they walk with one foot, namely the literal sense, not the spiritual. Also, literally, "they have limped," because they followed only the traditions of the Pharisees: 3 Kgs. 18: "How long will you limp on two sides? If the Lord is God, follow him."

[86931] "The Lord lives." Here thanksgiving is set forth; and regarding this he does three things. First he proposes it. Second, he sets forth its subject matter, at "God who gives," etc. Third, he breaks forth into praises of God, at "therefore the Lord lives." And he speaks after the manner of a king concerning God. In ancient times the mode of greeting a king was: "Long live the king!" This befits God, because he himself is eternal life: Ps. 35: "With you is the fountain of life." And therefore he says, "The Lord lives." Ezek. 33: "As I live, says the Lord God." For he is the giver of life to people: Jn. 1: "What was made, in him was life." Also, to others blessing is wished, but he himself is the very blessing: "Blessed be my God." "My God" refers to the Son: Is. 9: "A son is given to us." Ps. 66: "May God bless us, our God bless us, may God bless us." Dan. 3: "Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and worthy of praise and blessed forever." And because he fills us with blessings. Third, he desires his exaltation: "And let the God of my salvation be exalted," that is, the author and giver of the salvation of grace in the present and of glory in the future: Ps. 43: "You are my king and my God, who commands the salvation of Jacob." Also Ps. 73: "He has worked salvation in the midst of the earth." He does not ask that God be exalted in himself, because he is the Most High: Ps. 86: "The Most High himself has founded it." But that he be exalted in our knowledge. And he says, "of my salvation," that is, who saves me: Is. 45: "A just God and a savior, there is none besides me." Acts 4: "There is no other name given to people under heaven." Or "the God who saves me, may he be exalted" through his effect, so that he may save me not only in the lowest things but also in the highest: Mt. 21: "Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord; hosanna in the highest." Sir. 43: "Exalt him as much as you can, for he is greater than all praise." Ps. 98: "Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool, for he is holy."

[86932] "God." Here the subject matter of thanksgiving is set forth, both for the benefit of deliverance from evil and for the benefit of promotion to good; hence he says, "God," etc. And this can be said in the person of the Church, because those who persecute her will be subjected to her: Is. 60: "The sons of those who humiliated you shall come bowing to you, and they shall worship the traces of your feet." Just as Paul, who condemned Stephen, was struck down; hence it is a holy vengeance when a rebel is subdued and humbled. Therefore "you are my deliverer." Jn. 8: "If the Son shall make you free," etc. "From my enemies" -- not just any enemies, but "the wrathful": Prov. 27: "Anger has no mercy." Hence it is a greater glory to be delivered from fervent evils. "And from those who rise up against me": Ps. 26: "Unjust witnesses have risen up against me," etc. "You will exalt me." He says this to show God's providence, that is, in that by which they believe they are pressing him down, they are exalted: Phil. 2: "For which cause God also has exalted him." Gen. 7: "The waters were multiplied and lifted up the ark on high." "From the unjust man you will deliver me," that is, from the fraudulent: Ps. 139: "Deliver me, O Lord, from the evil man; rescue me from the unjust man." Next the thanksgiving is concluded on account of the aforesaid causes. "Therefore I will confess to you among the nations, O Lord," etc., that is, before all people I will praise you: Tob. 12: "Bless the God of heaven, and confess to him before all the living." "And I will sing a psalm to your name." In the psalm is understood good action, because whatever good we do, we ought to do for the glory of God's name. "Magnifying the salvation of his king." Jerome has: "thus to him who magnifies and acts," namely to him who magnifies and acts, according to our text, "God who gives vindication." And he is God inasmuch as he magnifies. And he sets forth two things: one pertaining to the state of the kingdom, another to the person, because both are magnified. Regarding the first he says, "magnifying the salvation of his king," because you have promoted me to the kingdom. Or "of his king," that is, of Christ, through whose name all are saved: Acts 4: "There is no other name given," etc. Regarding the person he says, "and showing mercy to his anointed, to David and to his seed forever," because he multiplied his seed as he had promised.
