Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 23
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 23

[86988] Having set forth the tribulation and the divine help, here the Psalmist commends the power of the one who assists. The title is not new in the Hebrew; but in the Latin is added "on the first day of the week." Here it should be known that, as it says in Ex. 20: "Remember to keep holy the sabbath day," etc., this is the third commandment. For in six days God made heaven and earth and all things that are in them, and on the seventh day he rested; and so we too ought to rest on the seventh day out of reverence. Hence all the days of the week are called sabbath, just as the Lord's Day is called the first of the sabbath. Mt. 28: "In the evening of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of the week." And from then on the whole week is called sabbath. Lk. 18: "I fast twice in the sabbath": hence this Psalm on the first of the sabbath commemorates those things which pertain to the first of the sabbath, that is, to the Lord's Day. On which three things were done: namely, the creation of the world, the production of light, and the resurrection of Christ, as is found in the Gospel, Mt. 28. The Psalmist therefore treats of these things: namely, of the power of the Creator, and the glory of the one rising; and perhaps this Psalm was sung on the first of the sabbath, but it seems to be disjointed. Nevertheless it should be known that in the time of David God was worshipped only in Judea; and David, considering that God is the God of the whole earth, and seeing in the prophetic spirit that it would come to pass that he would be worshipped in the whole world, composed this Psalm: and he treats of this here. This Psalm is therefore divided into three parts. In the first he sets forth his universal dominion; in the second he shows the manner by which men approach God, at "Who shall ascend"; in the third he foretells the future worship of God throughout the whole world, at "Lift up." Concerning the first he does two things. First he shows that God's dominion is universal; second he sets forth the sign or cause, at "For he himself founded it upon the seas." Or thus: in this Psalm he treats of three things. First, of creation; second, of illumination, at "Who shall ascend"; third, of the resurrection, at "Lift up," or of the glorification of the one rising. Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the power of the Creator; second he gives the reason, at "For he himself founded it upon the seas." Now it should be known that the earth can be considered in two ways: either as one element, or as the dwelling place of men: and in both ways it is under divine dominion. In the first way, there were some who did not extend divine providence to corruptible things, but only to the heavens. Job 22: "The clouds are his hiding place; he walks about the poles of heaven, and does not consider our affairs." Ezek. 9: "He has forsaken the earth, and the Lord does not see it." The Psalm says: you lie; because "the earth is the Lord's," namely the element itself over which he has dominion: or the earth, that is, the Church, which is the good earth that produces much fruit. Is. 40: "Who has weighed the mass of the earth with three fingers, and balanced the mountains in a scale and the hills in a balance?" But he adds, "and the fullness thereof." Gen. 1: "The earth was void and empty," etc., because it was not full of trees and other things that pertain to the adornment of the earth, such as plants and herbs. Or, "the fullness of the earth," that is, the fullness of the graces of the Church. And this is Christ, who brought every fullness of graces in himself. Sir. 15: "Your face is full of graces." Jn. 1: "Of his fullness we have all received." In the second way also, "the world is the Lord's," that is, our habitable earth. "And all who dwell therein," that is, all its inhabitants. Ps. 9: "He shall judge the world in equity, and the peoples in justice." Is. 45: "I did not create it (namely the earth) in vain; I formed it to be inhabited." The center is the lowest place in the world, toward which the earth tends by its gravity, and all other things yield to it: and Ps. 103 says: "He founded the earth upon its stability," because it tends there by gravity: and upon nothing, because nothing supports it from below; and Is. 40 says: "He has weighed the mass of the earth with three fingers," by coldness and the continuity of its parts. But because the earth is an element, and from it together with the other elements a compound is formed; and the earth is dry and cold, whence neither from motion nor from flowing is one part continuous with another, it needs moisture to hold it together and make it continuous, and so it is founded or established upon the waters; and because in nearly every part of the earth there is, as it were, a generation of waters, the whole earth can be said to be founded upon the water: for which reason he says, "He himself founded it upon the seas." Or just as a foundation holds a building together, so water holds the earth together, lest it become discontinuous. The discontinuity of the earth also causes the water, which is liquid and heavy, to flow throughout almost the whole earth. Likewise, by the world is designated the Church and all who dwell in it, namely the faithful; and we all belong to Christ: and whether we live or die, we are the Lord's, as the Apostle says in Rom. 14. Next he gives the reason for the aforesaid, because namely "he founded it upon the seas"; as if to say: that belongs to the craftsman which the craftsman himself makes. But God made the earth and the things that are on the earth. Therefore the earth and its fullness are his. But some say that God's providence does not extend to earthly things. But against this is the sign of great providence in the arrangement of the waters in relation to the earth, because the lighter elements ought to be above the heavier ones. Similarly therefore, just as the air surrounds the water, so the water ought to surround the earth. And the philosophers assign many causes for this. But the cause is divine providence, so that there might be a habitation for men and animals; hence Moses in the beginning, when he set forth the creation of things, first set forth the earth as formless; hence "the earth was void," that is, formless, "and empty" of trees; and therefore he presented it as surrounded or covered by water, "and darkness," that is, the waters, "were upon the face of the deep," that is, upon the earth, "and the spirit of the Lord," that is, the air, "was moving over the waters." Or "the earth was void," that is, invisible because of the waters; hence it follows, "Let the waters be gathered," etc., "and let the dry land appear"; as if to say: because the earth is first in the order of elements, it was done by divine providence that it should be above the waters, so that men and animals might live upon it, and the waters nonetheless occupy the earth as far as the seas extend: hence he says, "He himself founded it upon the seas," that is, next to them, as elsewhere: Ps. 136: "By the rivers of Babylon" (that is, beside the river of Babylon) "there we sat," etc. "He founded it," that is, established it firmly, so that the sea should not overwhelm it: Job 38: "I set bars and doors for the sea, and said, Thus far shall you come and no further; and here you shall break your swelling waves": Jer. 5: "Who has set the sand as a boundary for the sea, an everlasting decree which it shall not pass." "And upon the rivers he prepared it," that is, next to the rivers; and he says "prepared," not "founded," because for preparation it is required that it be irrigated by a river; Ps. 64: "The river of God is full of water; you have prepared their food, for so is its preparation: watering its furrows, multiplying," etc. Or the Church is founded upon the seas, that is, upon tribulations: Ps. 92: "Wonderful are the surges of the sea." And upon the rivers, that is, upon the persecutions by which the Church was prepared for the crowns of the martyrs. Or "upon the seas," that is, upon bitternesses; and yet for its consolation he prepared rivers of consolations: Ps. 45: "The rushing of the river makes glad," etc.

[86989] "Who shall ascend?" As if to say: he is great, and how shall one approach him? Eccl. 2: "Who is the man that can follow the king his maker?" And therefore he teaches the manner of reaching him: hence concerning this he does two things. First he poses the question. Second, the answer, at "The innocent in hands." In the question he asks two things: namely, about the way or the movement: "Who shall ascend?" And about the terminus: "Or who shall stand?" The mountain here signifies the height of divine justice or majesty: Ps. 35: "Your justice is like the mountains of God." The mountain therefore is the height of divine majesty, or the sublimity of Christ, who is called a mountain: Is. 2: "In the last days the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted," etc. Who therefore shall ascend so as to reach Christ and God? Holy men who dispose their ascents in their heart shall ascend, as the Psalmist says. Likewise: who will be able to stand there, where he is who is the holy place, the place of glory? Jer. 17: "The place of our sanctification, the expectation of Israel": Ex. 3: "The place where you stand is holy ground": as if to say: who shall be established there? But elsewhere, Ps. 121 says that this is so: "Our feet were standing in your courts, O Jerusalem." Hence next the answer is given.

[86990] "The innocent." And first he shows this in general. Second, in particular: "This is the generation." Concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes the merit. Second, the reward, at "He shall receive." In the merit there is one thing that pertains to innocence of action; hence he says, "The innocent in hands": Job 22: "The innocent shall be saved; and he shall be saved by the cleanness of his hands": Ps. 25: "I have walked in my innocence." Another pertains to the purity of the heart: and as to this he states that the heart must be kept pure from interior concupiscences: hence he says, "and clean of heart": Mt. 5: "Blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God." Likewise from every desire for temporal things: "Who has not taken his soul in vain," that is, who has not poured it out upon vain things, or who does not vainly glory in his virtues, or who does not allow his sensuality to reach the point of consenting to sin. Jerome has "who do not lift up in vain," because from purity of heart some become proud: Ps. 130: "Lord, my heart is not exalted." Likewise it pertains to truthfulness of speech; hence it follows, "nor has he sworn deceitfully to his neighbor": Zech. 8: "Do not love a false oath."

[86991] "He shall receive." Here the reward is set forth. The reward consists in two things: namely, in the attainment of goods: "He shall receive a blessing," that is, good things from God: Prov. 10: "The blessing of the Lord is upon the head of the just": 1 Pet. 3: "For unto this were you called, that you might possess a blessing as your inheritance." Likewise, in liberation from evils: hence he says, "And mercy from God his savior," who delivers from misery. Or in another way: the innocent in hands can approach; because he can be innocent for this reason, that "he shall receive a blessing from the Lord, and mercy," because he avoids sins; Rom. 9: "It is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who shows mercy." Next he shows this manner in general: "This is the generation of those who seek the Lord"; as if to say: in general there are many such: and these are the whole generation of those who seek God, who are innocent, etc. Hence Scripture speaks of the good as of one generation: Mt. 24: "This generation shall not pass away," namely of the good, etc. And he describes it by two things: namely, by their pursuit, because it seeks nothing but God: hence he says "of those who seek God," even in this life: Is. 55: "Seek the Lord while he may be found." To what end? That they may arrive at his vision; hence it follows, "of those who seek the face of the God of Jacob": Gen. 32: "I have seen the Lord face to face, and my soul has been saved."

[86992] "Lift up." This is the third part of the Psalm: in which he foretells how it was to come about that God would be worshipped in the whole world, as the literal sense explains. God is said to dwell in man through faith: Eph. 3: "That Christ may dwell through faith in your hearts": and through charity: 1 Jn. 4: "He who abides in charity abides in God, and God in him." Likewise, he is said to enter who begins to be where he was not before. God therefore enters into us when we begin to have faith in him. Once the whole world did not have faith in God: and this happened because of a twofold impediment: namely, because of the decrees of rulers, and because of ancient custom. The first happened because individual cities proposed to themselves laws of idolatry, and established particular gods: and this worship was, as it were, deeply rooted; the demons also fostered this. Likewise the angels were worshipped, whom they called the host of heaven: and these impediments were the gates or doors that, being shut, prevent entry into the house. He does three things. First he foretells what is to come. Second, he poses a question. Third, he gives the answer. He says therefore: "You rulers," that is, O evil men, or O demons, "lift up your gates," that is, raise up the impediments which you place so that men may not approach God. Jerome has "raise up"; as if to say, remove them, etc. Ps. 9: "You exalt me from the gates of death, that I may declare all your praises in the gates of the daughter of Zion." "And you, eternal gates," that is, the eternal and ancient impediment: "be lifted up," that is, be removed: Ps. 75: "You shine wonderfully from the everlasting mountains"; as if to say: you ancient impediments, remove yourselves from the hearts of men: and then he who is the "king of glory shall enter" into the world through faith and charity and worship. Or it can be said that there are twofold gates: some that are evil, which close the way to life; others that are good, by which the way of life is opened. Ps. 117: "Open the ways of life," that is, of justice, etc. The evil gates are sins; the good ones are virtues. He says therefore: O rulers, lift up your gates, that is, open them, and remove sins: and acquire the "eternal" gates, that is, the eternal gifts from the eternal God: "be lifted up," in your hearts, and the king of glory shall enter. He speaks prophetically, because from the beginning not all believed at once, but they doubted; as if to say: whom do we want to believe, and whom do we want to obey? The God of the Jews? Ex. 5: "I do not know the Lord, and I will not let Israel go." And therefore he shows this when he says, "Who is this king of glory?" And he answers: "The Lord, strong and mighty." A king appears glorious for three reasons. Because first he acquires great things by strength; hence he says "strong": Prov. 12: "The hand of the valiant shall rule": Job 9: "If strength is sought, he is most mighty." Second, because of his power; and he shows this when he says "the Lord, mighty," because he is most powerful to rule: Job 36: "God does not cast away the mighty": Dan. 7: "His power is an everlasting power," etc. Third, because he is a good warrior; hence he says "the Lord, mighty in battle," by which he conquered death and the Devil in all things: Rev. 5: "The lion of the tribe of Judah has conquered." Or "strong" in his own nature, "mighty" in jurisdiction over his own, and "mighty" against adversaries. Now what he says a second time, "Lift up," etc., can be called a repetition: and this so that the hearers may not delay in learning who this mighty one is. Or the first is addressed to the rulers, that is, to the demons; but what he says here is addressed to the good angels, who also by their own dignity, though not by their own effort, were previously worshipped by men who venerated them: 2 Kgs. 17: "They worshipped all the host of heaven": as if to say, remove the impediments on account of which men worship you. And therefore here he says, "The Lord of hosts, he is the king of glory." In the Gloss, however, there is another exposition. Christ descended to hell and ascended into heaven: and here he foretells both of these. And first he admonishes the infernal powers to open up; hence he says, "Lift up," etc. O infernal rulers, open your gates: "and be lifted up," etc. "And the king of glory shall enter." But when the demons asked, "Who is this king of glory?" he answers: he who was "strong and mighty in battle" against you. Second he admonishes the citizens above us to open the gates of Paradise. Hence Christ, responding as if with the voice of a herald and acting in that role, directing his voice toward heaven, says: O heavenly rulers, "lift up," that is, open, "your gates," etc. "And he shall enter," etc. And to those asking, he says, "The Lord of hosts, he is the king of glory." Now it should be known, as Dionysius says, that this is not to be understood as though the angels were ignorant of the mystery of the incarnation; but in wonder they said, "Who is this king of glory?" because the glory of Christ surpasses all knowledge. For sometimes Christ himself teaches about himself through Scripture, as it says in Is. 63: "I who speak justice," etc. But here not he himself, but others concerning him, namely the angels, respond, "The Lord of hosts," etc.; because some angels receive illumination immediately from God, as it says in Is. 6: "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and it was full," etc. Others receive it from those angels, such as the middle and lowest orders: and to these the answer is given here by other angels.