Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 3
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 3

[86799] The preceding Psalm showed the assault of adversaries; here, against their assault, he implores divine help. And this Psalm is composed in the manner of a prayer. In this Psalm we can lay down the historical foundation, then set forth the allegorical sense, and further the moral sense. The historical sense is clear from the title, which is: "when he fled from the face of Absalom his son." As is found in 2 Sam. 15, Absalom the son of David, pursuing his father, sought to kill him. David yielded before him with his followers, going out of Jerusalem with bare feet. He understood that this was happening to him because of the sin of murder and adultery, as Nathan the prophet had foretold to him: 2 Sam. 12: "The sword shall never depart from your house, because you have despised me." While Absalom was pursuing David, the army of David turned against him. Absalom, carried by the charge of his mule, was driven under a branching oak, where the intertwining branches caught his neck, and hanging there with his head caught fast, he was slain by Joab, the commander of David's army. With Absalom dead, David was restored to his kingdom and reigned in peace. Against this persecution, then, is this Psalm: "Lord, why," etc. Through this, however, was prefigured the persecution that Christ suffered from His son Judas. Jn. 13: "Little children, yet a little while I am with you." And again Mt. 9: "Can the children of the bridegroom mourn?" etc. Christ fled from Judas when, upon Judas's departure, He withdrew with the other apostles to the Mount of Olives as the Passion drew near. And just as David showed peace to his wicked son when he commanded the people going out to battle, "Spare the young man Absalom," and when he was killed, said, "Who will grant me that I might die for you, my son Absalom," etc., so too Christ toward Judas the traitor, as is clear in the supper and in the kiss. For this reason Absalom is rightly called "peace of the father." For "Abba" in Hebrew is interpreted in Latin as "father," and "Shalom" means "peace." And Judas himself betrayed Christ with a show of peace. And just as Absalom, so too Judas died by hanging. With Judas dead, Christ reigned in peace, because He rose in glory. And it can be applied to all the tribulations of the Church. It can also be applied morally against the tribulations that one suffers from enemies, whether temporal or spiritual. And therefore the sentiment of a man imploring help is expressed. Concerning this, then, he does two things. First he sets forth the assault of the adversaries, or he lays before God his torment. Second, he acknowledges that divine help is at hand, at "but you, O Lord," etc. He sets forth the persecution with regard to the number of those doing harm: "they are multiplied," namely peoples, nations, kings, and princes. And not only these outsiders, but even his son. Ps. 39: "They are multiplied above my head," etc. And with regard to the motive for doing harm, because it is without cause. Hence: "why?" 1 Sam. 10 and 26: "What have I done, or what evil is in my hand?" And with regard to the manifold torment, because they vex him with many tribulations. Hence: "they trouble me." A thistle is a prickly plant: Gen. 3: "Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to you." Those therefore trouble who prick. They pricked Christ by striking Him with fists, scourging, spitting, mocking, and threatening death. And this is what he says: "many rise up," namely in deed. For Absalom wished to kill David, as is clear in the counsel of Hushai, 2 Sam. 17. Likewise Judas betrayed Christ to death. They also trouble by words, detracting or proposing falsehoods; hence, "many say," etc. Against what is said in Ps. 36: "The salvation of the just is from the Lord." For if the wicked would consider this, they would not easily rise up against the just; but because they do not believe it, or because they despise the power of God or the justice of the man, they say by word and deed, "there is no salvation for him," etc., that is, in Him whom he worships and makes his God. This the persecutors also say of Christ: for if they had hoped He would rise, neither would Judas have betrayed Him, nor would they have killed Him. And the meaning is: He will not save him, nor is He the Son of God. Hence they said, Mt. 27: "If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross"; and below: "If he is the King of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him."

[86800] "But you." This is the second part, where he shows that help from God is prepared for him. And concerning this he does two things. First he shows that divine help is especially present to him. Second, that it is present generally to all, at "salvation is of the Lord." And concerning the first he proposes three things. First, divine help. Second, the experience of that help, at "with my voice." Third, the confidence of security, at "I will not fear." He says therefore, "but you, O Lord"; as if to say: these rise up to wage war, but you receive me under your protection. And this is better expressed through Jerome's text, which says: "my shield round about me," as though defending me like a shield. Not only preserving me in life against those who wish to destroy me, but also in glory against those who defame me; hence he says, "my glory." 2 Cor. 10: "He who glories, let him glory in the Lord." Jer. 9: "Let him who glories glory in this, that he knows and understands me." And not only do you stand by me against those who defame me, but you also make me prevail against those who oppress me; hence he adds: "lifting up my head." Ps. 26: "And now I have lifted up my head above my enemies." These can be referred to Christ, who was conceived according to His human nature in the incarnation, because "the Word was made flesh," Jn. 1. Is. 42: "Behold my servant, I will uphold him; my elect, my soul delights in him." Ps. 64: "Blessed is he whom you have chosen and taken up." He was also made glorious in the resurrection: Jn. 17: "Glorify me, O Father." And He was exalted in the ascension; Phil. 2: "Therefore God also," etc.

[86801] Then when he says, "with my voice," he shows the experience of help. And he sets forth three things: namely, prayer, at "with my voice." Second, being heard, at "and he heard me." Third, he shows in what he was heard, where he says, "I slept," etc. Concerning the first, he touches on two things that must be present in prayer: for it must be attentive. And so he says: "with my voice," namely the voice of the heart, which sounds to God -- with which Moses, though silent with his mouth, was crying out in his heart to the Lord. Ex. 14: "The Lord said: Why do you cry to me?" etc. With this voice too Susanna was heard when she cried out: Dan. 13: "She, weeping, looked up to heaven, for her heart had confidence in the Lord," etc. 1 Sam. 1: "Now Hannah was speaking in her heart," etc. 1 Cor. 14: "I will pray with the spirit, I will pray also with the mind." And so he says "my voice." For when a voice does not proceed from the heart, it is not mine. Likewise, prayer must be rightly directed; for it is rightly directed when it tends where it should. And so he says, "to the Lord," where help is. 2 Chr. 20: "When we do not know what to do, this alone remains for us, that we direct our eyes to you." Ps. 120: "My help is from the Lord." Likewise, it must be devout; hence he adds, "I cried out." For prayer is said to be clamorous on account of the greatness of the affection. Ps. 101: "Let my cry come to you," etc. Heb. 5: "With a strong cry and tears," etc. Then the hearing is set forth, when he says: "and he heard me from the mountain," that is, from the height of the divine majesty, which is inaccessible. Ps. 23: "Who shall ascend the mountain of the Lord?" -- that is, to His omnipotence. Or from the height of His justice, because it is incomprehensible: Ps. 35: "Your judgments are a great deep." Or "from the holy mountain," that is, from me who was a holy mountain, of which Is. 2 says: "And in the last days the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared," etc. There follows, "I slept." Here he shows in what he was heard -- because he rose. Now there is a difference between the dead and one sleeping: because the dead does not rise again. Job 14: "Do you think that a dead man shall live again?" But one sleeping does rise. Ps. 40: "Shall not he who sleeps rise up again?" Thus when tribulation is so great that a man does not return to his former state, it is called death. But when one who is troubled or tempted falls into sin and rises again, he is said to sleep. Thus David, as it were, slept, because he was freed from his son and from sin. He is said to sleep, as it were briefly; but to slumber deeply, as it were for a long time. Hence another reading says, "I took sleep," that is, I slept deeply. Thus Christ is said to have slept, because He willingly offered Himself to the Passion; and because He was in deep slumber, death followed. Hence from sleep He passed into deep slumber. This slumber is signified in the sleep of Adam. Gen. 2: "The Lord cast a deep sleep upon Adam," etc., because from the side of Christ dead on the cross the Church was formed. He says therefore, "and I rose up," namely by His own power. Jn. 10: "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it up again." And this is because "the Lord received me." Another reading: "He sustained me." For He had the power of divinity, that He might rise. Ps. 36: "When the just man falls, he shall not be destroyed, because the Lord puts His hand underneath him."

[86802] Then when he says, "I will not fear," the confidence of security is set forth. As if to say: since I have been heard in this way, "I will not fear," etc. Below, Ps. 26: "Though armies should stand against me," etc. In this is signified that the Church of Christ cannot be wholly cast down. Even after the resurrection, the multitude of people who surrounded the crucified Christ could do Him no harm; for "Christ rising from the dead now dies no more," Rom. 6. And whence he has this confidence he shows when he says, "arise," that is, manifest your power by making me rise from death. And this means, "save me," etc. "Because you have struck," etc. Above he had said two things: that they trouble him -- "Lord, why are they multiplied who trouble me" -- and against these he says: "because you have struck." Likewise they defamed him -- "there is no salvation for him," etc. -- and against these: "the teeth of sinners," that is, their malicious words, "you have brought to nothing." Job 29: "I broke the jaws of the wicked," etc. Jerome's text has, "you have struck the jaw and the teeth"; as if to say: you struck so powerfully that their teeth were broken. The jaw was Absalom, and the teeth were those adhering to him. Hence when Absalom was destroyed, the others were crushed.

[86803] Finally when he says, "of the Lord," he shows that divine help extends to the whole people. And first with regard to preservation from evil; and so he says, "salvation is of the Lord." And therefore prayer must be directed to God. Second, with regard to the multiplication of goods; and so he says: "upon your people be your blessing," that is, upon the people who hope in you and in you, and not in another, be your blessing. The blessing of the Lord always implies the multiplication of goods. Prov. 10: "The blessing of the Lord makes rich." This Psalm can also be read otherwise according to the Gloss, so that the whole Christ speaks, that is, the Church and her Head, situated amid the storms of persecution. Or morally, this Psalm can be read in the person of any individual believer who is assailed by vices and desires. And according to this, by David is understood any believer, and by Absalom vices and carnal concupiscences, as is clear in the Gloss.
