Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 18
============================================================

Commentary on Psalm 18

[86933] Above, the Psalmist gave thanks in many ways for benefits both given and hoped for; but here, from the consideration of those benefits, he rises to the praise of the Benefactor. The title is clear: "To the end, a Psalm of David." According to the letter it refers to David; but according to the mystery, to Christ, "to the end." This Psalm is divided into two parts. In the first, God is commended for his instruction by which he teaches us. And this in two ways. One is general, which applies equally to all, and this is manifested through his works: Rom. 1: "The invisible things of God are clearly seen, being understood through the things that are made." The other is special, through the giving of the law, which pertains only to the faithful. The second part begins at "The law of the Lord is unspotted." This Psalm is truly expounded of Christ, because the Apostle brings forward the authority of this passage for the mystery of Christ in Rom. 10: "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth," and so on. Nevertheless, just as the mysteries of Christ are sometimes represented figuratively in the figures of the Old Testament, so too they are sometimes figuratively foreshadowed in the figures of the works of the saints. And therefore this Psalm will first be expounded according to the figure, and secondly according to the truth. First he speaks of the heavens, then of the sun. By the heavens the apostles are understood; by the sun, Christ is understood: "In the sun." Concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the teaching by which God instructs us through the heavens, however understood. Second, he excludes impediments to this teaching, at "Day to day utters speech," and so on. Two things are necessary to know about God. One is the glory of God, in which he is glorious. The second is his works. If we consider the corporeal heavens, they announce to us the glory of God, because in them there is a wondrous and ordered distinction, which is a certain overflow of that firmness of glory: Eccl. 43: "The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, the world on high shining forth, the Lord." And because "the sun giving light has looked upon all things, and the work of the Lord is full of his glory." And therefore these material heavens are understood to indicate to us the glory of God, not as living material things, as Rabbi Moses says, but in their beauty by which their Maker is much more clearly indicated. And the firmament shows us how magnificent God is. The firmament is called heaven, as it says in Gen. 1: "God called the firmament heaven." But according to the distinction, it is called heaven; and thus in the distinction of the heavens, divine wisdom appears. If the whole is taken together, it narrates his power. And therefore he says that the heavens declare, that is, manifest, the glory of God, and the firmament announces the works of his hands, through which works his power appears. But according to the truth, by the heavens the apostles are understood, in whom, as in heavens, God dwells. And they are called heavens because of the sublimity of their way of life: Phil. 3: "Our citizenship is in heaven." Likewise they are adorned with stars, because of the abundance of their many virtues: Eccl. 43: "The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars": Is. 55: "As the heavens are exalted above the earth," and so on; because they are luminous through teaching and example: Mt. 5: "So let your light shine before men, that they may see your good works and glorify your Father who is in heaven." Because they revolve through obedience and the course of preaching: Sir. 24: "I alone have compassed the circuit of heaven, and I walked in the waves of the sea, and I penetrated the depths of the abyss, and I stood in every land, and in every people and in every nation I held the primacy." These declare the glory of God, namely of the Father, in which is Christ. And because Christ is equal to the Father, and that he is God, and that he freely forgives sins: Is. 52: "You were sold for nothing, and you shall be redeemed without money." Likewise the apostles are called the firmament, because they were strengthened by the power of the Holy Spirit: Lk. 24: "Stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high." And they announce the works of his hands, that is, the wonderful things that Christ did, namely his nativity, passion, resurrection, and ascension: Eccl. 42: "Has not God made the saints declare all his wonders?" Is. 12: "Announce this in all the earth." Ps. 95: "Announce his glory among the nations, his wonders among all peoples." Or, the heavens declare, because the heavens sent a new star, announcing the birth of the Savior: Mt. 2: "We saw his star in the east."

[86934] "Day." Here he excludes the impediment to teaching, and he excludes a threefold impediment. Sometimes teaching is impeded so that it cannot be learned because of time; sometimes because of the variety of languages; sometimes because of diversity of places. The first impediment concerns nighttime, for it is not a time for reading, since it is a time for resting; and according to different times it is fitting to teach and to learn. And first we must speak of material days that are caused according to nature from the motion of the heavens. And therefore it is necessary to consider not only the substance of the heavens but also the motion of the firmament; and thus wisdom must be understood in this alternation: Eccl. 33: "Why does one day surpass another day, and one light another light, and one year another year, from the sun? By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished," that is, disposed above. And therefore he says, "Day," succeeding, "to day utters speech," that is, the day of wisdom, that is, it manifests the order and goodness of divine wisdom, insofar as one day is greater than another, and so on. On one day the heat is greater than on another, and so with each. "And night." Above he showed divine wisdom and the order of divine disposition, because night succeeds night in an ordered way. And he says that day "utters," because the time of day is the time of speaking; and therefore it is the time of the word. For this reason he says, "utters speech." But nighttime is the time of meditation, because of quiet; and therefore in the quiet of the night a man meditates and discovers many things by which he becomes knowledgeable; and therefore it is the time of knowledge. And therefore he says, "And night," succeeding, "to night declares knowledge," that is, of God; because in one night there is a different disposition of time than in another; and all of this comes from the knowledge of God who disposes it. According to the truth, the apostles are called days. And this is what he says: "Day," that is, the apostles, "utters speech" of divine wisdom "to day," that is, to the perfect: 1 Cor. 2: "We speak wisdom among the perfect"; for not all things are preached to all, but clear things to the clear, holy things to the holy, great things to the great. Likewise the apostle, insofar as he is night, that is, living in the flesh and mortal, condescending to the weakness and ignorance of the unlearned, as night "declares knowledge to night," that is, to the perfect, but about human things: 1 Cor. 3: "I could not speak to you as to spiritual persons, but as to carnal. As little ones in Christ, I gave you milk to drink, not solid food." Or "day," that is, Gabriel, "utters speech to day," that is, proposes the word of the Savior to the Blessed Virgin; but "night," that is, the Devil, "declares knowledge to night," that is, to Eve: Gen. 3: "You shall be as gods, knowing good and evil." Likewise, secondly, teaching is impeded by the variety of languages; but this teaching is not impeded thereby, because "there are no speeches nor languages" -- that is, whatever those tongues or nations may be, they can be instructed in divine wisdom and power, and this whether through the heavens or through the apostles. But according to the truth it must be said that "there are no speeches," and so on, "whose words are not heard," because the voices, or preaching, or teaching of the apostles is heard by everyone. But concerning the speech of the apostles there is a twofold opinion. For some say that the apostles spoke in one language but all others understood them. But against this is the Apostle in 1 Cor. 14: "I give thanks to my God that I speak in all your tongues." Hence "there are no speeches in which they are not heard to speak." Speeches signify principal languages, but discourses signify varieties of idioms in the same language. Or speeches are tongues; discourses are modes of speaking. Now there is a threefold mode of speaking: one humble, which we commonly use; another, when it is adorned; and another, when it is merely ornate. The first befits one who teaches. The second, one who persuades. The third, one who delights; and the apostles spoke in each of these modes: Is. 28: "In the speech of lips and in another tongue I will speak to this people." Likewise, an impediment to teaching is the diversity and remoteness of place, because teaching sometimes does not reach remote parts; but it is not so with this teaching, because "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth," namely of the heavens, or of the apostles, because everywhere is the teaching by which the heavens instruct. But it is better said of the apostles, because he says "has gone forth," not "they went forth" -- "the sound," that is, the fame, "and to the ends of the world their words." Is. 12: "Sing to the Lord, for he has done great things; announce this in all the earth": Mt. 28: "Going, teach all nations." And therefore he says, "To the ends of the world their words": because the sound reaches to remote places, and the words to nearby places. But it is not so with the apostles; rather, even the words, that is, the distinct sound, reached to the ends of the earth, whether by some prophecy or by the fame of miracles.

[86935] "In the sun." Above, the Psalmist made mention of the heavens; and here, to show the praise of the Creator, he treats of the sun. And just as by the heavens the apostles are understood, so by the sun Christ is understood: Mal. 4: "To you who fear my name, the sun of justice shall arise." And certain prophecies speak this of Christ under the figure of the sun; therefore he first sets forth the figure through which he begins to explain the truth about Christ. Concerning the figure he sets forth three things. First, the position of the sun. Second, its motion: "And he as a bridegroom." Third, its effect: "There is no one who can hide himself," and so on. First it should be known that Jerome's different text has: "He has set a tabernacle for the sun in them"; as if to say, thus the heavens declare, and so on. And for them, namely the heavens, he set a tabernacle for the sun, that is, he placed it in the heavens. The tabernacle is fittingly used because this world is a place of wayfarers, not of those dwelling in a fixed place, since they are in continual motion. But our text has, "In the sun he has placed his tabernacle." The house of a certain lord stands more beautifully in a city than in the country; so the tabernacle of God appears more beautifully in heaven. And therefore he says, "In the sun he has placed his tabernacle," as if to say: the sun is his tabernacle -- not that God is contained in a place, but because, as Dionysius says, in the sun the goodness and power of God, or divine goodness, is most represented. Concerning the motion of the sun he says two things: "From the highest heaven." Note that he speaks of the heaven as it is in its motion, which is the end of the night and the beginning of the day. And insofar as it is the end of the night, it is nothing other than the going forth from the hidden into the manifest, because it does not rise as though it then begins to exist, but because it is then made manifest. And therefore he likens it to a bridegroom coming forth from his bridal chamber, because just as the bridegroom is hidden in the bridal chamber, so the sun is hidden at night. Therefore he says, "He as a bridegroom coming forth from his bridal chamber." But insofar as it is the beginning of the day, he sets forth four things: namely, its property or efficacy, its magnitude, its swiftness, and the regularity of its motion. Its property, because night indicates sadness, but the day makes joyful: Ps. 29: "In the evening weeping shall have place, and in the morning gladness." And therefore he says, "He has rejoiced." Its magnitude, because it is great among all particular corporeal things; and therefore he says, "As a giant." Its swiftness; hence he says, "To run." Its regularity; hence he says, "The way," because it does not deviate from the straightness of the way, as some planets do. Likewise he explains this similitude when he says, "From the highest heaven." And what is said here can be understood in two ways. In one way, because there are two points according to the astronomers, namely the summit of the heavens, where the sun is when it is at midday, and the opposite point, which is the angle of the earth, where the sun is at midnight. And this is what he says, "His going forth is from the end of heaven," according to those who begin the day from midnight, "and his circuit even to the end thereof," with respect to the angle of heaven where it is at midday. But if it is referred to one high point, there is one point where the sun is at midday. And this is what he says, according to the astronomers who count more days from midday; as if to say: from the meridian point is his return, namely of the sun, to that same place: Eccl. 1: "The sun rises and sets, and returns to its place." His effect is manifested when he says, "And there is no one that can hide himself from his heat"; as if to say, the sun at its meridian so scorches the earth and is so hot that in some lands a man can scarcely endure: Eccl. 43: "At noon it scorches the earth, and who can withstand its burning heat?" But according to the signified reality, the mysteries of Christ are designated. And first his conception is designated. Second, his nativity. Third, his progress. Fourth, his ascension. His conception is designated when it says, "In the sun he has placed his tabernacle." Now it is customary that by tabernacle the body is understood: 2 Pet. 1: "I know that the laying aside of my tabernacle is at hand, as our Lord Jesus Christ has signified to me": 2 Cor. 5: "We who are in this tabernacle groan." What therefore he says, "In the sun he has placed," and so on, that is, he placed his body in the sun, that is, in the Blessed Virgin, who had no obscurity of sin: Song 4: "You are all fair, my love, and there is no spot in you." Or, in the sun there are three things: it shines, it burns, and it distinguishes the turns of the seasons. "In the sun he has placed his tabernacle," that is, in the open, because though he was invisible, through the assumption of a body he was made visible: Jn. 1: "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." Likewise, "in the sun," that is, in burning heat, "he placed his tabernacle," that is, his body, because he assumed a passible body: Is. 53: "Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows." Likewise, he subjected it to change; and he who according to his divinity was eternal, according to his humanity was made temporal: Ps. 30: "My times are in your hands." Or, "his tabernacle," that is, the Church: Rev. 21: "Behold the tabernacle of God with men." He placed it "in the sun," that is, in the open: Mt. 5: "A city set on a mountain cannot be hidden." His nativity is designated when it says, "He as a bridegroom coming forth from his bridal chamber." The bridal chamber is the virginal womb. From this he came forth as a bridegroom, because in that perpetual union he espoused human nature. Hence in death the divinity remained united to the soul and the body: Hos. 2: "I will espouse you to me in faithfulness." The course of his way is described by its joyfulness. Hence, "He has rejoiced," inwardly, namely with spiritual joy, which neither death nor any sadness in the sensory part could disturb, because even in his passion he enjoyed blessedness: Is. 42: "He shall not be sad nor troubled"; because from the sadness of the sensory part no sadness arose in the higher part; yet the whole suffered according as it was nature, but not according as it was turned toward God. Likewise it is described by its magnitude, because, "as a giant" of twofold substance, because of the divine nature in which he is great: Ps. 76: "Who is so great a God as," and so on, and of the human nature in which also he is great: Lk. 1: "He shall be great," and so on. By its swiftness, because he accomplished our salvation in a short time; hence he says, "To run the way": Acts 10: "He went about doing good and healing," as it were swiftly.

[86936] "From the highest." Here he continues on the ascension, and concerning this he does three things. First, he sets forth the fitting ascension. Second, its terminus. Third, its fitting effect. The first, when he says, "From the highest heaven is his going forth." It is natural for each thing to tend to its own connatural place. The highest natural place is owed to him who has the highest nature. Christ was born from the Father having the highest nature: Eph. 4: "He who descended is the same who also ascended." And therefore he says, "From the highest heaven is his going forth," namely, through his eternal generation. And he says, "from the highest," not from the ethereal or the empyrean or any other, but from the being of the Trinity, because he is consubstantial with the Father, the same in essence. Then he sets forth the terminus. He says therefore: "And his circuit is even to the highest point thereof": Jn. 16: "I came forth from the Father and have come into the world; again I leave the world and go to the Father." The effect follows: "And there is no one who can hide himself from his heat": Eph. 4: "He gave gifts to men." Likewise: "He ascended above all the heavens, that he might fill all things." The sun, when it is on high, warms all. So Christ, ascending, sent the Holy Spirit to his disciples; hence he says, "And there is no one who can hide himself from his heat." The Holy Spirit warms: Song 8: "Its lamps are lamps of fire." But do not many fail to receive his warmth? It must be said that as it is with the material sun, so it happens with the Holy Spirit. Many can hide themselves and not receive the heat of the sun, but the sun for its part offers itself to all; so the Holy Spirit is poured out everywhere and seeks to be received by all, unless someone hides himself through malice. Or, "there is no one who can hide himself," and so on: because even if the sinner does not receive him, still he cannot be hidden from being known by him, and so on. Prov. 15: "Hell and destruction are before the Lord."

[86937] "The law." Above, the Psalmist treated of God's general instruction, which takes place through creatures; now he treats of the special instruction which takes place through legislation. And concerning this he does two things. First, he sets forth the commendation of the law. Second, he treats of the offenses committed against the law, at "Who can understand sins?" And fittingly, after the mysteries of the incarnation of Christ, he treats of the old law, which was fulfilled by Christ and the new law handed on. Concerning this he does two things. First, he shows the goodness or rectitude of the law. Second, its sweetness or lovableness, at "More to be desired." Concerning the first he does three things. First, he commends the law in general. Second, the things contained in the law, at "The testimony of the Lord." Third, he commends those things that are adjacent to the law, at "The fear of the Lord." Now it should be considered that he says two things about the law of the Lord: both that it is unspotted and that it converts. And this can refer to each law, namely the new and the old. And they are set in contrast to human law, in which certain unlawful things are permitted, such as usury and houses of prostitution; for it cannot correct all things. But the law of the Lord is not such; rather, it is unspotted, that is, excluding all evils: Ps. 11: "The words of the Lord are chaste words," and so on. Job 6: "You will not find iniquity on my tongue, nor will folly resound in my jaws." Likewise, human law does not extend itself except to those matters over which human judgment has competence, namely only to exterior things: 1 Sam. 16: "Man sees what appears, but God beholds the heart." And therefore human law restrains from exterior things, though divine law converts the heart to God. And therefore he says, "converting," not only exterior acts, but "souls." But the old law did this imperfectly, the new law perfectly, because the old law restrained through temporal punishments, which coerce the hand, but the new law restrains through eternal punishments, which coerce the heart. Now three things are contained in the law: testimonies, judgments, and precepts. Testimonies, because divine law necessarily proceeds upon certain matters of belief: Heb. 11: "He who comes to the Lord must believe." And therefore testimonies are necessary by which the right faith of a man may be tested; and so there are in it testimonies and ceremonies. And he says two things about them: that the testimonies or precepts have something trustworthy, and that they bestow wisdom. But human doctrines have something untrustworthy and do not bestow wisdom. Untrustworthy, because the ancients fabricated certain falsehoods in their laws, as seemed to them useful for the states: for example, that certain men were born from gods, so that they might conceive great spirits; and that those who governed well were transferred to the gods, so as to encourage good governance of the commonwealth. But the testimony of the Lord, that is, the doctrine or divine commandment, is trustworthy, that is, it has truth; but that other doctrine is false: Ps. 92: "Your testimonies, Lord, are made exceedingly credible." And this is because that law orders only the things of this present life; but divine law orders toward the future life. Rom. 8: "The sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come that shall be revealed in us." Testimonies are properly called those things in the law which generate the authority of the one commanding in the hearts of subjects, so that they obey the precepts -- such as that God is one, and that he is the Creator of heaven and earth, and things of this kind. And because the ceremonial precepts are owed solely from divine authority, they could be called testimonies; but the moral precepts are grounded in the obligation of every virtue; and the judicial precepts are grounded in obligation between men regarding contracts. Now that human law does not bestow wisdom: for there is some wisdom in human affairs, where there is some truth, such as philosophical wisdom; and there was a certain wisdom that the priests used in the temple, and this is false; and this was proposed to many. But that philosophical wisdom was proposed to few, whereas divine wisdom is proposed to little ones, that is, to the people: Deut. 4: "This is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of the peoples." Or, "to little ones," that is, to the humble: Mt. 11: "You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to little ones." "The justices of the Lord are right," that is, those judgments that are spoken of in Ex. 22: "He who has stolen an ox or a sheep," and so on. Is. 26: "The path of the just is straight for walking": Prov. 21: "It is joy for the just man to do justice, and dread for those who work iniquity." And he says two things about them: that they are right, and that they are joyful. Right, because they contain justice. What is right is called just: Prov. 8: "All my words are just, and there is nothing wicked or perverse in them; they are right to those who understand," and so on. Joyful, not harsh and disturbing, because they are mixed with equity; hence he says, "Rejoicing hearts," because of the equity and the hope of reward: Ps. 118: "I shall rejoice in your words." But the moral precepts are bright and illuminating; hence he says, "The commandment of the Lord is bright." It is called bright because it is manifest and evident in itself, as here: "You shall not kill," "You shall not commit adultery," "You shall not steal," and similar things, which have clarity in themselves, that everyone is bound to observe, as Prov. 6 says: "The commandment is a lamp, and the law is a light." A precept is called that to which attention is directed according to the command of a superior; and it concerns things to be done, and imports a duty of acting in the one to whom it is commanded. This duty arises either from the divine rule which we are bound to follow -- and thus that falls under obligation without which the order of reason cannot be preserved; or it is a duty from the authority of the one commanding, whom we are bound to obey; or from the end, which we entirely desire, which is appointed for us -- and then that falls under precept without which we cannot maintain subjection to the one commanding, or without which we cannot attain the intended end. For a precept is so called as though "precisely taken," namely for acting -- as though we are precisely bound to do that. And therefore such a precept is "enlightening the eyes," namely of reason, which eyes are darkened by the desire for exterior things and the interior passions of concupiscence; and the precept of the Lord removes this, and therefore it is "enlightening the eyes." "Enlighten my eyes, lest I ever sleep in death," Ps. 12.

[86938] "The fear." Here he sets forth certain things that are adjacent to the law, of which one is on our part, namely fear, which leads us to observe the precepts: Eccl. 12: "Fear God and keep his commandments." And he says two things about this fear. First, he says it is holy. Second, he says it endures. Now all fear is caused by love, because a man fears to lose what he loves. And therefore, as there is a twofold love, so there is a twofold fear. There is a holy fear that is caused by holy love; and an unholy fear, caused by unholy love. Holy love is that by which God is loved: Rom. 5: "The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts by the Holy Spirit who has been given to us." This holy fear does three things. First, it fears to offend God. Second, it refuses to be separated from him. Third, it subjects itself to God through reverence. And this fear is called chaste and filial. Unholy fear is that which is caused by unholy love, which is of the world and of oneself. And from such unholy love a twofold unholy fear is caused: servile, which is from love of self; and worldly, which proceeds from love of the world: Mt. 10: "Do not fear those who kill the body," and so on. Concerning holy fear: Ps. 33: "Fear the Lord, all you his saints, for there is no want to those who fear him." Worldly fear does not endure except with the world; servile fear endures in the wicked forever; but holy fear endures in the good. Concerning this the Psalm says: "The fear of the Lord is holy, enduring forever and ever." But against this: "Perfect charity casts out fear," 1 Jn. 4. It must be said that charity expels servile fear; but filial fear endures in two ways, namely in the homeland. First, as to its reward: Ps. 9: "The patience of the poor shall not perish forever." Not that patience is there, because there is no tribulation, but its fruit endures; and so the fruit of fear endures: Sir. 1: "It shall be well with him who fears God in his last days, and on the day of his death he shall be blessed." Or it endures as to a certain act of its own: not that it fears to offend, because there it does not fear sin or separation, but as to reverence, because they will submit themselves to God and will not dare to make themselves equal to him: Job 26: "The pillars of heaven tremble and quake at his command." On God's part there is another thing, namely his judgment, which is called the execution of justice: Ps. 93: "Until justice be turned into judgment." And these are done insofar as he punishes or rewards. And therefore the judgments of the Lord are said to be "true, justified in themselves": true because of their rectitude, because in them there is always truth: Rom. 2: "The judgment of God is according to truth against those who do such things." For they do not follow human testimonies, but are "justified in themselves," because they either do not follow another higher law, but are justified in themselves; or because in themselves the very judgments of the Lord have evident justice: Ps. 36: "And he shall bring forth your justice as the light, and your judgment as the noonday."

[86939] "More to be desired." Above, the Psalmist commended the divine law as to its rectitude; here he commends it as to its sweetness and pleasantness. And concerning this he does two things. First, he sets forth its commendation. Second, he proves such a commendation, at "For your servant keeps them." He prefers the law, as to the desire of the soul, to all worldly things. Now in worldly things, exterior riches and bodily pleasures are desired. And the delight of the law of God is above these. As to the first, he says that these things which have been said are "more to be desired than gold": Prov. 8: "Wisdom is better than all the most precious riches, and nothing desirable can compare with it": Ps. 118: "I have loved your commandments above gold," and so on. And he touches on those two things that men desire; hence he says "gold," and pomp, hence "precious stone." Precious stones serve only for appearance; hence "much" can refer either to the stone or to "precious." Likewise, as to the second, he says, "And sweeter than honey and the honeycomb": Ps. 118: "How sweet are your words to my jaws, sweeter than honey to my mouth." He says "honey and honeycomb" with respect to bodily pleasures. Honey is extracted from wax, but the honeycomb is honey and wax together. Bodily pleasures are sometimes manifest, and so it is honey; sometimes they are hidden and sweeter, and so it is the honeycomb: Prov. 9: "Stolen waters are sweeter," and so on. Or, they are preferred to the honeycomb because of the Old Testament, in which the truth is in the figure like honey in the comb; and to honey because of the New Testament, where the truth is manifest. But are spiritual delights more delightful? It must be said that yes, and there is a threefold reason. First, on the part of the good that gives delight, which is a greater good, and from the cause of delight, which is a greater good, therefore more delightful. Second, on the part of the power that delights, because the intellectual power is stronger than the sensory power. Third, from the manner of the delights. Bodily delights consist in becoming and in motion, as in food and other things. But motion is something imperfect, and implies something future and past, because the whole is not had all at once. Spiritual delights, however, are not in motion, because they consist in loving and understanding the good, which is not in motion. But accidentally, those bodily delights are more desired, insofar as some abound in sense but are lacking in intellect. Or, holy men love the precepts of God more than themselves. And the saints are designated by gold and precious stone: 1 Cor. 3: "If anyone builds upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones." Likewise, by honey and honeycomb are signified those who are strangers to worldly things; but the honeycomb signifies those who still take delight in worldly things. And such people, because they are not entirely detached, love themselves more than the precepts; others love the precepts more than themselves. And he proves this in two ways. First, by experience. Second, from the effect. By experience, when he says, "For your servant keeps them"; as if to say: I can say they are sweet because I have tasted them, for I love them and experience them. No one can bear witness except he who experiences: Jn. 7: "If anyone is willing to do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it is from God or whether I speak of myself": Job 23: "My foot has followed his steps." From the effect, that is, from recompense, he proves the same when he says, "In keeping them there is great reward": Mt. 5: "Rejoice and be glad, for your reward is great in heaven." And he does not say "for keeping," but "in keeping them," because the very keeping of them is a great reward, namely the glory of the heart and its purity: 2 Cor. 1: "Our glory is this: the testimony of our conscience." And thus the law is commended for its honesty when he says, "in keeping them," and so on, because the honest is the same as virtue, and is desirable in itself.

[86940] "Offenses." Here he prays concerning the offenses of those who transgress the law. And first he sets forth the hiddenness of sins. Second, he asks for their remission, at "From my hidden ones." Third, he sets forth the reason for the petition, at "If they shall not have dominion over me," and so on. He says therefore: we frequently offend against the law, but "Who can understand sins?" As if to say, no one. And this for three reasons. First, because sin blinds the eyes of the sinner, hence small sins are not easily discerned: Wis. 2: "Their own malice has blinded them." Second, because sins are many: Ps. 39: "Evils without number have surrounded me; my iniquities have overtaken me, and I was not able to see." Likewise, because of their subtlety: Ps. 39: "They are multiplied above the hairs of my head," from their subtlety. But he does not say "sins" but "offenses." There is a twofold kind of sin: namely, of transgression -- and this is more easily known, because a man knows he has done a wicked act. And also of omission -- and this is difficult to know, because these do not bind at all times, but according to place and time. And distinguish: when it is the proper place and time, it is difficult to affirm -- and when alms should be given, how and where, and so on. Then he sets forth the remission of sins. Now there is a twofold kind of sin. One takes its beginning from ourselves, and this is principally original sin, and those which proceed from the corruption of the fomes, such as sins of the flesh; and these stain the soul, because they join it to earthly things. And therefore he says, "From my hidden ones cleanse me," that is, those which proceed from a hidden root, or which are done in secret, or which arise from a secret will: Eph. 5: "The things that are done by them in secret, it is shameful even to speak of." Sometimes they take their origin from another; therefore he says, "From those of others spare your servant." But is another's sin imputed to someone? Ezek. 18: "The soul that sins, it shall die." It must be said that it is not, when it is entirely another's. But when it passes to you by imitation: Sir. 13: "He who touches pitch shall be defiled by it." Or by persuasion, or by consent: Prov. 1: "My son, if sinners entice you, do not consent to them." Or by dissimulation at the due time and place, then it becomes your own and is imputed: Rom. 1: "Not only those who do such things are worthy of death, but also those who consent to those who do them." And this applies especially to prelates who knowingly overlook the crimes of their subjects. And he says, "Spare your servant," because these sins seem to come upon us from divine wrath, namely that such occasions of sin are given to us. Or, "from those of others," from proud men: Ps. 17: "The sons of strangers have lied to me."

[86941] "If they shall not." Here he sets forth the reason for the petition. And first, on David's part, he asks for immunity from evil. Second, for perfection in good: "And they shall be pleasing." He asks for immunity from evil in two ways: from future evil and from past evil. He says therefore, "If they shall not have dominion over me," or "shall not have dominated," namely sins: Ps. 100: "In the morning I put to death all the sinners of the land," that is, all sins, which are called earth because of the many properties of earth, "that I might destroy out of the city of the Lord all the workers of iniquity," that is, all iniquitous works. Or, "they shall not have dominated," namely the proud. Or "strangers," that is, sinners, or demons, who are said to dominate when they drag one to consent: Jn. 8: "Whoever commits sin is a slave of sin." If therefore they shall not have dominated, "then I shall be unspotted," that is, I shall preserve myself without the stain of mortal sin, even if not of venial sin: Job 15: "What is man that he should be unspotted?" Concerning the past he says, "And I shall be cleansed from the greatest sin": Is. 1: "If your sins be as scarlet, they shall be made white as snow"; Job 11: "If you put away the iniquity that is in your hand, and let not injustice remain in your tabernacle, then you shall be able to lift up your face." Or "the greatest," namely pride, because it is the beginning of all sin: Sir. 10: "There is no greater sin than to apostatize from God," and this happens through pride. Hence the sin that is from pride is worse than that which is done from ignorance or from weakness; for pride is the beginning and cause of all sin, and whoever is free of it is truly unspotted. Then he sets forth what pertains to perfection in good. And first, of the mouth; hence he says, "And the words of my mouth shall be such as to please." As long as a man is in sins, his words do not please God: Sir. 15: "Praise is not fitting in the mouth of a sinner": Ps. 49: "But to the sinner God has said: Why do you declare my justices and take my covenant upon your lips?" Likewise, he sets forth the perfection of the heart, which requires the pleasure of God; hence he says, "And the meditation of my heart always in your sight," that is, before the angels; or, "you who see within and examine the conscience." And this I say because you, Lord, are my helper in doing good, and my redeemer from avoiding evils: Is. 44: "Return to me, for I have redeemed you."