Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 49
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 49

[87271] Above, the Psalmist invited the nations to trust in God; here he instructs them in the worship of God. The title: "A Psalm of Asaph." This Asaph was one of those placed over the singers of the people, and over those who sang and praised with cymbals, as is said in 1 Chr. 13 and 16 and 25. And it is called a Psalm of Asaph because it is sung by the ministry of Asaph. And it is fitting to the mystery, because Asaph is interpreted as "synagogue," and thus the person of the synagogue is read here. Where, instructed concerning sacrifices, he proposes two things about the worship of God that precede the divine judgment; and this is the first. The second is the disputation of God with the people concerning his worship, at "Hear, O my people." Before the judgment there will be three things: the citation of the judge, the coming of the judge, and the preparation. First, therefore, he sets forth the citation; second, the coming, at "Our God shall come manifestly"; third, the preparation, at "A fire before his sight." Concerning the first he does three things. First, he shows who the summoner is; second, who are summoned, at "And he called"; third, in what order they are summoned, at "Out of Zion." He who summons is great, because he is the God of all, even of gods. Hence he says, "The God of gods, the Lord, has spoken." First, therefore, he is commended for the excellence of his nature, because the God of gods, not an Angel. Jerome has, "the mighty God." But are there many gods? 1 Cor. 8: "For indeed there are many gods and many lords." For "God" is said in three ways: namely, by nature -- and this is but one God. Dt. 6: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord your God is one." Likewise, by participation, and these are many. 1 Cor. 8. Likewise, by designation and opinion, such as idols and stars, Venus and Saturn. Ps. 95: "All the gods of the nations are demons." But certain ones can be called gods in four ways. In one way, by union; and thus Christ alone is called God. Jn. 20: "My Lord and my God." Others by the grace of adoption. Ps. 81: "I said, you are gods," etc. Some by participation in divine power in working miracles. Ex. 7: "I have made you the god of Pharaoh." Others by ministry, as judges. Ex. 22: "You shall not detract from the gods." Likewise, he is commended for his governance, when he says, "The Lord has spoken." He spoke interiorly through inspiration. Ps. 84: "I will hear what the Lord God speaks in me." Likewise, by exterior speech. Heb. 1: "In these last days he has spoken to us," etc. "And he called the earth," namely the whole earth, that is, all the inhabitants of the earth. Hence those summoned are not only some in the middle of the world, but "from the rising of the sun to its setting." Mk. 16: "Going into the whole world," etc. Jer. 16: "The nations shall come to you from the ends of the earth and shall say: Surely our fathers possessed falsehood," etc. The order of the calling is set forth when he says, "Out of Zion is the beauty of his comeliness"; as if to say: this calling began in Zion. Is. 2: "Out of Zion shall go forth the law," etc. For the apostles, when they received the Holy Spirit, were in Zion, and then they were made strong to go throughout the world. Out of Zion, therefore, where the apostles were, began to be spread abroad the beauty of his comeliness. But Christ indeed began to some extent to be made known; but his beauty was not seen, because he was surrounded with weakness, because "we saw him the last of men, a man of sorrows," as is found in Is. 53. But after the Passion, his power and authority appeared.

[87272] "God shall come manifestly." Here he treats of the coming; and he says two things about the second coming, against two things that were present in the first. In the first coming, God came hidden in the weakness of humanity. Ezek. 32: "I will cover the sun with a cloud." And Is. 45: "Truly you are a hidden God." But then he will be manifest. Rev. 1: "Behold, he comes, and every eye shall see him." 2 Thess. 2: "Whom the Lord Jesus shall kill with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming." Likewise, in the first coming he showed meekness. Is. 53: "As a lamb before its shearer, he was led." Hence he said nothing before the princes and priests, nor before Pilate; but then he will not be silent, but will speak. Is. 42: "I have been silent, I have always been quiet, and I have been patient" -- in judgment, when I was being judged, when I was tolerating the wicked -- "but I will cry out like a woman in labor." And he says "our"; as if to say: this God who comes is none other than ours, outside of whom there is no salvation. Jerome begins the verse: "Out of Zion, perfect in beauty, God shall appear"; as if to say: God shall appear out of Zion, which is perfect in the beauty of the Holy Spirit. With respect to the first he adds, "God shall come manifestly." With respect to the second, "A fire shall burn before his sight." Here he sets forth the preparation of the one who comes. Princes have their insignia and swords carried before them. Rom. 13: "He does not bear the sword without cause"; as if to say, because they have the power of judging. So before Christ shall precede signs of vengeance and ministers of the judge. First, therefore, he sets forth the signs and instruments of vengeance. Second, he shows the power with respect to the ministers, at "He has called." The instrument of divine judgment is twofold. One is principal, on the part of the punishing fire; and the other on the part of the whole creation fighting against the senseless. Wis. 5. With respect to the first he says, "A fire shall burn before his sight." Literally, fire shall precede before him, as is found in Heb. 10, because a consuming fire shall burn and purge the surface of the earth, and shall purge whatever needs purging in the good, and finally shall cast the wicked into Hell. Or the fire of a remorseful conscience. Is. 50: "Walk in the light of your fire." With respect to the second he says, "And round about him a mighty tempest," which shall arise from the agitation of all the elements before the judgment. Lk. 21: "There shall be signs in the sun," etc., and the agitation shall be so great that even the powers of heaven shall be moved. The tempest, that is, the indignation, shall be round about him, that is, in the saints who shall be around him. Is. 3: "To punish sinners." Job 27: "Want shall seize upon him like water." Prov. 1: "When sudden calamity comes."

[87273] "He has called heaven from above," etc. Having set forth the coming of the judge to judgment and the preparation of the judge with respect to the instrument of punishment, here he sets forth the preparation for the judgment with respect to the ministers. And first he treats of the attendance of the ministers; second, of the office of the Angels, at "Gather together"; third, of the office of the apostles, at "It shall be announced." In the first part, mention is made of heaven and earth. And this is understood in two ways. In one way, it is understood by metonymy, the container for the contained, so that by "heaven" he designates the saints who are in heaven, and by "earth" he designates men who are on earth; and all of these are called to judgment. And this is the second calling, because above he said, "And he called the earth," because that calling is the calling to faith, to which all are called, good and bad. Mt. 13: "The kingdom of heaven is like a net cast into the sea," etc. But this second calling is for separating, because "they chose the good into their vessels, and cast the bad forth." And therefore he says, "to discern his people," by the separation of the good from the bad. Mt. 25: "He shall separate the sheep from the goats." Ps. 42: "Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause." But the heavens are called differently from the earth; because heavenly men are called for this purpose as judges. Mt. 19: "You who have left all things," etc., up to "the tribes of Israel." The earthly are called to be judged. Joel 3: "I will gather all nations and bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat." Or, "he called heaven," that is, the heavenly, that is, the just, to their reward. Dan. 12: "The learned shall shine like the brightness of the firmament," etc. "And the earth," that is, the earthly, that is, the wicked, to punishment. There can also be another sense, so that heaven and earth stand for the corporeal creatures themselves; and thus they are called by way of testimony or assault against the unfaithful, because in them the wicked were able to perceive from heaven and earth. Job 20: "The heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him," namely against the sinner. Or, "he called heaven from above," to give up the souls of the saints which it holds, and the earth, to give up the souls of the wicked which it holds in the depths. And with this the reading of Jerome agrees, which says, "Gather to me all my saints"; as if to say: for this purpose he calls, to present his saints. "Gather to him his saints." This is the office of the Angels, namely to gather the elect at the judgment. Mt. 24: "He shall send his Angels," etc. And this is the voice of the prophet Daniel to the Angels sent for ministry. For his saints are those who order the covenant above sacrifices. The word "above" is taken in two ways. In one way, as designating the order of the material cause; and then the sense is, "above sacrifices," that is, who made a covenant with God concerning sacrifices to be offered. And he made mention of sacrifices for two reasons. First, because the following disputation will be about sacrifices. Second, because the disputation at the judgment will be only with the faithful, who will be judged. And these are those who made a covenant with God in sacrifices. In another way, so that "above" denotes excess. And thus it must be said that by "covenant" is understood the New Covenant, which surpasses; hence the sense is, "above sacrifices," that is, who prefer the New Covenant to the sacrifices of the Old Covenant. Or the covenant promised by God; and thus, "above sacrifices," that is, who consider the goods promised by God as greater than all our merits. Rom. 8: "The sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared," etc. Or by "covenant" the soul has a pact with justice, mercy, faith, and such things. Hos. 2: "I will espouse you to me in faith." And thus they are "above sacrifices," that is, who prefer spiritual goods of this kind to bodily sacrifices. Hos. 6: "I desire mercy and not sacrifice." Or, "who order the covenant," etc., that is, who in the sacrifices they offer to God have regard for the covenant of God, because some refer the good things they do to something else, so that they may be gathered into it. 1 Cor. 10: "Do all things for the glory of God." "The heavens shall announce." The office of the apostles is to announce, and these are designated by the heavens. Hence the "heavens," that is, the apostles, "shall announce the justice of God." And they are called heavens because they are eminent above all the choirs of the saints, and they illuminate the whole Church. Ps. 18: "The heavens declare the glory of God." They shall announce, moreover, "that God is the judge," by instructing through doctrine. Acts 10: "He it is who was appointed by God to be judge of the living and the dead." They instruct, therefore, about the future judgment. 2 Cor. 5: "We must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ." In another way, they shall announce by promulgating the sentence against the wicked by the authority of the judge, when they shall sit upon twelve thrones, as is said in Mt. 19.

[87274] "Hear." Here he treats of the disputation of the judgment. In the disputation of the judgment three things are necessary. One is required on our part. Another on the part of God. The third is the disputation itself. On our part there is required hearing, not only exterior and bodily with respect to things heard bodily, but also interior. Sir. 6: "If you love to hear," etc. And therefore he says, "Hear," that is, attend even interiorly. Mt. 13: "He who has ears to hear, let him hear." "My people," because he who is not of his people does not hear him. Jn. 6: "Everyone who hears from my Father." Likewise, Jn. 8: "Therefore you do not hear, because you are not of God." On the part of God there is required speech and testimony; and therefore he says, "and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify to you." Now there is a twofold speech of God. One is exterior, through preachers. Heb. 1: "In times past, God spoke to the fathers through the prophets." The other is interior, through inspiration. Ps. 84: "What the Lord God speaks in me," etc. Likewise, testimony is twofold. One is through miracles. Jn. 5: "The works that I do give testimony of me." The other is through witnesses. Is. 44: "You are my witnesses." Acts 1: "You shall be witnesses to me," etc. And thus these can be the words of Christ instructing the people. "Hear, O my people, and I will speak; O Israel, and I will testify to you" through miracles. Jn. 5: "The works which my Father gave me to accomplish." Likewise, Jn. 5: "Search the Scriptures." And therefore, I will speak through miracles and through Scriptures, that is, it will be apparent that I speak the truth and that I am true through the Scriptures. And what shall I testify? "I am God, your God," namely singularly. Ex. 20: "I am the Lord." And he says "am," on account of eternity, because he does not decline either into the past or into the future. And he says, "your God," because of the seed of Abraham. Rom. 9: "From whom Christ is according to the flesh."

[87275] "I will not reprove you for your sacrifices." Here he treats of the disputation itself. And concerning this he does three things. First, he rejects the old sacrifice. Second, he introduces the new sacrifice, at "Offer to God." Third, he repels the wicked from this sacrifice, at "But to the sinner." Sacrifices are professions of faith; and therefore, being about to set forth concerning the worship of God, he first sets forth concerning faith in the one God. And first he proposes his intention; second, he assigns the reason. He says, therefore: I will come and judge, and "I will not reprove you for your sacrifices," which you have not omitted. But on the contrary: whoever at that time would have omitted them would have erred; but for every error one will be brought to judgment, as is said in Eccl. 12. It must be said that a man is reproved when he does not do the will of his superior. But the will of God is your sanctification, 1 Thess. 4. Now these sacrifices do not contribute to your sanctification; and therefore they are not willed by God in themselves, but insofar as they are signs of something else. And therefore Hos. 6 says: "I desire mercy and not sacrifice." And insofar as they are signs of interior virtue, [men] are properly reproved for the virtues they did not practice, not for the sacrifices. He makes the reason clear, first on their part; second, on his own part. Hence he says, "Your holocausts are always in my sight"; as if to say: I will not reprove you for sacrifices, because you are ready to offer carnal sacrifices, because they gladly offered sacrifices on account of the fact that they delighted in them at banquets. Is. 22: "Behold, joy -- to sacrifice victims," etc. Or, differently: "I will not reprove you for sacrifices," namely carnal ones, because "your holocausts," namely spiritual ones, "are always in my sight," that is, they please me. And these are, as Gregory says, when everything is offered to God, namely when one offers oneself and all that one has, and thus spends it in the service of God. On the part of God he makes the reason clear when he says, "I will not accept calves from your house." The reason I will not reprove you for sacrifices is that what I do not principally seek, I do not principally reprove. There were two principal sacrifices: the calf and the goat. Lev. 4. And he shows that he does not accept these two, that is, approve them, from the house of carnal men: "From your flocks," namely carnal ones, "I will accept," that is, approve, "goats." Mic. 6: "Can the Lord be appeased with thousands of rams?" "For all the beasts of the forests are mine." He proves what he said, namely that he approves neither calves nor goats, and that if he were in need, he would not accept them from their house. No one asks for something that is in his own power; but all things that they offered were in the power of God. Three things were offered in the Old Covenant: four-footed animals, birds, and fruits, namely first-fruits and bread. With respect to the first he says, "All the beasts of the forests are mine." Four-footed animals are divided into two kinds: some are wild and some domestic. And although wild animals were not offered, yet he enumerates them to make it more apparent that even the domestic ones are his. Mystically, moreover, various kinds of persons can be designated by these animals. Hence he says, "wild beasts," that is, unbelievers; "beasts of burden," that is, the faithful; "oxen on the mountains," that is, the apostles -- all are mine. With respect to the second he says, "I know all the birds of heaven," that is, these are subject to my providence. By these birds the holy Angels are understood, who are a likeness. With respect to the third he says, "And the beauty of the field is with me," that is, whatever is beautiful in them serves me. Or, "the beauty of the field is with me," because I am everywhere. And [it says] "is," because I always am, without past or future. "If I should be hungry, I would not tell you." He concludes through an impossibility: if I needed them, I would not tell you, that is, I would not ask them of you. Why? "Because the world is mine and its fullness." Ps. 23: "The earth is the Lord's," etc.

[87276] "Shall I eat?" Above, the Psalmist, in the person of the Lord, assigned the reason why the Lord will not accept goats, even if he were in need; here, however, he shows that he has no need. It should be known that in the law it is commanded that the flesh of holocausts be burned and that the blood be poured out at the base of the altar. And someone could suspect that God delighted in the blood and flesh of those animals. This was also the opinion of the pagans, that their gods delighted in the odors of flesh and the pouring out of blood, as Augustine says. And the Lord says that he does not delight in these things, which do not please in themselves. And therefore he says, "Shall I eat the flesh of bulls, or shall I drink the blood of goats?" As if to say: no, because I have no need, nor do I take delight in them, because I delight in those things which are in themselves the food of God. But the food of God is other than the flesh and blood of animals; for the food of God is that which is the food of all the saints. Lk. 22: "I dispose to you, as," etc. And thus the nourishment of the saints and of God is the same. But the saints are nourished by the very love of God; and thus God is nourished in the enjoyment of himself. Tob. 12: "I use invisible food and drink that cannot be seen by men."

[87277] "Offer to God." Here he shows what that sacrifice is which God accepts. And first he shows what God accepts from man. Second, what he gives in return. The Lord requires two things from man. First, the sacrifice of praise. And praise is called a sacrifice because sacrifice is nothing other than a profession of interior devotion and faith; for through sacrifice we acknowledge God as the creator of all things. 1 Chr. 29: "All things are yours, and what we have received from your hand we have given to you." Augustine, in the book On Christian Doctrine, says that no sign is as expressive and as signifying the intention of the heart as the word, and exterior faith; and devotion cannot be better expressed than through the devotion of praise. And thus praise is more acceptable to God than the killing of animals. Heb. 13: "Through him let us offer the sacrifice of praise always to God." Hos. 14: "We will render the calves of our lips." Second, the Lord requires that one pay one's vows to the Most High. And therefore he says, "And pay your vows to the Most High." Praise is a sacrifice to God insofar as it is a sign of interior devotion, because praise signifies that a man offers his mind to God; and this is what God wills to be rendered to him, and this is the vow, and thus the vow is an act of worship. Is. 19: "They shall worship him with sacrifices and offerings, and they shall make vows to God and pay them." Eccl. 5: "If you have vowed anything to God, do not delay to pay it."

[87278] "And call upon me." Here the Lord sets forth what he will give in return to those who worship him. And first he shows what the saints suffer. Second, what they do in tribulations. Third, what they receive from God. Fourth, what they render to God in return. He says, therefore, that by the fact that someone pays his vows, he is nevertheless afflicted. Ps. 68: "My enemies persecute me unjustly." And the reason for this is that unless the just were afflicted in this world, many would serve God not for his own sake but for the sake of prosperity. Second, he shows what they do in the time of tribulation, because they must call upon him: "And you shall call upon me." What shall God do for him? He shall free him: "I will deliver you." Ps. 119: "When I was in tribulation, I cried to the Lord," etc. And afterwards, once freed, he must honor God: "And you shall honor me."

[87279] "But to the sinner God has said." Here he bars certain ones, namely sinners, from the sacrifice of praise; and he sets forth three things. First, human perversity. Second, God's patience. Third, he threatens divine severity. Human perversity consists in this, that they say good things and do evil; and therefore he shows how they are unworthy to speak good things. Now there is a twofold good: one is the instruction of morals, the other is formation for the praise of God. He says, therefore: you, namely my people, "offer to God the sacrifice of praise," etc. "But to the sinner God has said," that is, by God's preordination it is fixed that it is unjust for him to say good things and do evil. And he said this because it is impressed in the minds of all, even of sinners. And what did he say? "Why do you declare my justices?" Rom. 2: "You who preach not to steal, do you steal?" But does one who is in the state of mortal sin commit mortal sin when he preaches or teaches? It must be said that his sin is either public or hidden; and if hidden, it is either from contempt and without penance, or with penance. It must be said, therefore, that if someone is in public sin, he should not publicly preach or teach. And I say "public," because if the sin is not public, he could with charity privately admonish his brother concerning a sin even lesser than his own hidden sin, yet admonishing himself as well. But if he is in hidden sin and without penance, then he provokes God, because he simulates. Prov. 11: "The dissembler deceives his friend with his mouth." And it is of these that he speaks here, as the Gloss of Augustine says: "Let the tongue, which the conscience contradicts, not presume to praise." But if the sin is hidden and he grieves over it, he does not sin by preaching or teaching, even if he speaks publicly against that sin, because by detesting the sins of others he also detests his own. "And you take my covenant in your mouth." "Justice" refers to instruction; "covenant" refers to the praise of faith. Sir. 15: "Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner," because the name of God is most holy; and therefore it is unfitting for it to be taken up by sinners, as if usurped. Prov. 26: "As a lame man has fine legs in vain, so a parable is unseemly in the mouth of fools." "But you have hated discipline." Here he shows the evils that sinners commit. And they commit two evils: the first is that they hate divine correction. Hence he says, "But you have hated discipline." This correction of morals is accomplished through difficult things. Heb. 12: "All discipline for the present indeed seems not to be of joy, but of sorrow." The wicked hate this. Heb. 12: "If you are without discipline," etc. Ps. 118: "Goodness and discipline," etc. Amos 5: "They have hated him who reproves in the gate." You, therefore, do not wish to be corrected by others when you sin daily, "and you have cast my words behind you," by which you are formed for doing well and meriting. Such words should be held in reverence. But these, namely sinners, do not receive them nor consider them. Ezek. 33: "They hear your words and do not do them, because they turn them into the song of their mouth." Or, "you have cast them behind you," that is, you have regarded them as nothing, so that you do not even consider them. "If you saw a thief, you ran with him." Here he sets forth the malice of sinners with respect to the commission of evil. But a little earlier he showed their defect with respect to the desertion of good, when he said, "But you have hated," etc. And first he sets forth their wickedness with respect to evil works; then with respect to evil words. He says, therefore, "If you saw." Where it should be known that these words are proposed in the person of God to the sinner who announces and preaches the justice of God. And they are especially suited to prelates and teachers, who do not easily fall into sin themselves, but consent to others who sin, and these things are turned against them. Rom. 1: "Not only those who do these things are worthy of death, but also those who consent," etc. 1 Sam. 2: "Eli was punished because he did not correct his sons." Therefore he reproves them for this. And he touches on two things, namely theft and adultery. With respect to the first he says, "If you saw a thief" brought before you for judgment, "you ran with him," not correcting him. Is. 1: "Your princes are faithless." Likewise, "with adulterers you placed your portion," because you do not correct adulterers, but flatter them and cover for them and support them when they come to your notice. Jer. 9: "They are all adulterers." But spiritual theft is when from the words of Sacred Scripture a corrupter steals the true meaning; and thus seeing someone corrupt and conceal the true meaning, and you consenting, you run with him. Jer. 23: "Behold, I am against the prophets who steal my words." Spiritual adultery is when words are twisted to another sense or to another end; for example, if someone preaches for gain or seduction. 2 Cor. 2: "We are not, as many, adulterating the word of God."

[87280] "Your mouth." Here he treats of the sin of the mouth, which is aggravated in two ways. First, from circumstances. Second, from the condition of persons, at "Sitting." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he sets forth the aggravating conditions, namely frequency. Another is deceit. Frequency: because if someone occasionally commits some sin, it is in some way tolerable. Or if from a slip of the tongue he says something disordered, it is more easily borne. Jas. 3: "If anyone does not offend in word, he is a perfect man." But if someone fills his mouth with curses, then it proceeds from his own malice; for from the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, Mt. 12. Ps. 13: "Whose mouth is full of cursing," etc. The sin of the tongue is also aggravated by deceit or fraud. Jer. 9: "Their tongue is a wounding arrow; it has spoken deceit." And therefore he says, "And your tongue contrived deceits," that is, composed them and, as it were, as a teacher arranged deceits so that his words might be pleasing. Prov. 12: "A witness who is hasty contrives words of falsehood." "Sitting, you spoke against your brother." Here he shows how the sin of the tongue is aggravated by the condition of persons. And first, by the condition of the speaker; second, by the condition of the one spoken against; third, by the condition of the hearers. He says, therefore, "Sitting." It sometimes happens that someone says a bitter word when he is moved and provoked; and this is somewhat tolerable. But when someone with a calm heart, unprovoked, says evil things, this is wicked and detestable. And therefore he says, "sitting," namely at ease. Ps. 68: "Those who sat in the gate spoke against me." From the person of the one spoken against, the sin is aggravated: because if he were speaking against a wicked person, it would be different. But he says, "against your brother." Jer. 9: "Let everyone guard himself from his neighbor." "And against the son of your mother you set up a scandal." Here he shows how the sin is aggravated on the part of those who are scandalized by it, namely the hearers. And therefore he says, "you set up a scandal," namely of others, against your brother. And what he says, "the son of your mother," shows that little ones still nursing are called sons of their mother, and the lowly are scandalized by the evil words that he speaks. "These things you have done, and I was silent." Here he treats of God's dissimulation. And first the dissimulation of God is set forth. Second, the effect of the dissimulation upon the wicked is set forth, at "You thought." He says, therefore, "These things you have done," namely all the things said above: you spoke good things and perpetrated evil, so that the Psalmist thus speaks in the person of God, "and I was silent," as though I did not immediately correct and punish you; but out of clemency and mercy I waited for you to repent. Is. 42: "I was silent, I was always quiet." Rom. 2: "Do you not know that the kindness of God leads you to repentance?" But the evil and sinful man abuses this clemency in pride. Rom. 2: "According to your hardness and impenitent heart, you treasure up for yourself wrath," etc. And therefore he says, "You thought wickedly that I would be like you." Now it was said above, "If you saw a thief," etc. Sinners argue from this and the wicked believe that sin pleases God and that he does not punish, because he is silent: "These things you have done and I was silent." But this supposition is wicked, because "the wicked man and his wickedness are alike hateful to God," as is said in Wis. 14. And Hab. 1: "Your eyes are too pure to look upon evil, and you cannot look upon iniquity." "But I will reprove you." Here, then, divine severity is set forth. And first in his reproof. Second, in its effect. He says, therefore, "I will reprove you," that is, I will condemn you. Ps. 6: "O Lord, do not correct me in your wrath." In wrath is the effect: "I will set you against your own face." God, who punishes, does not only punish through himself, but through other creatures. Wis. 5: "The whole world shall fight with him against the senseless." Likewise, the man himself fights against himself through the remorse of conscience. And thus he also fights against himself and reproves himself by his own means; and this is what he says: "I will set you against your own face," that is, you yourself will condemn yourself. Jn. 8: "Has no one condemned you? No one, Lord. Neither will I condemn you." Or, "I will set against your face," namely creatures, as is said in Wis. 5 -- whether rational, that is, Angels and saints, or irrational, which he used badly in sins. Job 7: "You have set me as contrary to you, and I am become a burden to myself," because the sinner will say against himself, Wis. 5: "We have erred from the way of truth." Nah. 3: "I will reveal your shame to your face." Is. 3: "The appearance of their countenance shall answer them." And this punishment is the worm of conscience.

[87281] "Understand these things, you who forget God." Here he exhorts sinners to consideration. And first, to considering the severity of God. Second, he shows what is acceptable to God in sacrifices. First, therefore, he exhorts to understanding. Hence he says, "Understand these things, you who forget God," namely, consider the things that have been said. And this is necessary, because you have forgotten God. Dt. 32: "You have forgotten God your creator." Second, what he means by "understand": "Lest he seize you," namely the Devil, "and there be no one to deliver," namely from his power. When the Devil seizes for the punishment of Hell, there is no one who delivers. Sometimes he seizes unto sin, and God delivers the sinner. Ps. 90: "He shall deliver him." That he does not deliver from the power of the Devil unto punishment is not from impotence, but from his justice he does not will it. "The sacrifice of praise shall honor me." Here he concludes what is acceptable to God in sacrifices. And he shows a twofold fruit in them. One fruit is on the part of God, that his excellence may be manifested; and this is done through the sacrifice of vocal praise. 1 Cor. 10: "Do all things for the glory of God." The other fruit is on our part, namely true salvation. Hence he says, "And there is the way by which I will show him the salvation of God," that is, unto seeing God. Is. 52: "They shall lift up their voice; together they shall praise." Jerome has, "And he who walks in an orderly manner, I will show him the salvation of God"; as if to say: two things are necessary for salvation, namely the sacrifice of praise and that you walk in an orderly manner.