Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 39
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 39

[87196] In the preceding Psalms, the Psalmist invoked divine help against the malice of the wicked and showed the purpose of his caution; here, however, he treats of confidence in divine help. And concerning this he does two things. First, he describes this confidence itself. Second, he treats of the mercy that is the cause of confidence, at Ps. 40: "Blessed is he who understands." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he commemorates the confidence he has in God, continuing from past events. Second, by seeking future things, at "But you, O Lord." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he commemorates the confidence he has in God by recounting past benefits. Second, he shows the mercy of God through which he bestows benefits, at "You have done many things." This Psalm mystically treats of the change from the old covenant to the new. The title: "Unto the end, a Psalm of David." In other Psalms, the "end" is taken as referring to Christ. Rom. 10: "Christ is the end of the law." Here the "end" is taken as the new covenant, which is the end of the old. 1 Tim. 1: "The end of the commandment is charity." Concerning the first part, he commemorates three things. First, the efficacy of confidence in general. Second, he touches upon it in particular, at "He set." Third, he shows this to be present in others, at "Many shall see." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he touches upon the confidence, showing it to be efficacious. Second, the sign of confidence. He says therefore, "Waiting, I waited." This text is understood as meaning that David, in his own person, many times waited for divine help. But because he speaks in the person of the Church, it is better that it be understood as referring to the human race awaiting the grace of the new covenant. And he says, "Waiting, I waited for the Lord," to show continuity: because although he delayed, yet he did not fail: Hab. 2: "If he delays, wait for him, for he will surely come." And thus every just person ought always to remain in confidence in God, because he does not fail those who hope in him. Or it refers to the various states of those who waited: because the patriarchs and prophets and all others waited, as is commonly held. To the outward waiting he adds intention, when he says, "And he attended to me": because although God hears all, yet he does not attend to all, because not all are ordered to the good; and therefore, "He attended to me," that is, for my benefit. The sign of confidence is supplication: because no one finally asks unless he hopes to be heard. And therefore he says, "And he heard my prayers": Ps. 142: "He regarded the prayer of the humble, and he brought me out of the pit of misery." Here he presents in particular the efficacy of confidence in the things in which he was heard. And he touches upon three things. First, deliverance from evils. Second, the bestowal of goods, at "And he set." Third, thanksgiving for both, at "And he put." Now there is a twofold evil from which men flee: namely the evil of misery and of punishment. As to the first he says, "He brought me out of the pit of misery." And this can also refer to the temporal misery in which David once found himself. And the temporal misery is called a pit because of its depth and multiplicity. It can also refer to the misery of guilt: because "sin makes peoples miserable," Prov. 14. And both can be reduced to the guilt of carnal vices, when he says, "from the pit of misery," that is, from the depth of carnal sins. Or it can refer to spiritual sins, by which a just person is entangled in sins; hence he says, "from the mire of the dregs." Referring to carnal sins, he does not say "mire" simply, but "of the dregs," or "of dung" according to Jerome, because mire in uncorrupted earth is not sediment, nor is it foul and abominable. Or, "the pit of misery," that is, hell, from which the saints were led out by Christ. And the mire is the reproach from which the saints were led out, in which they were held by the demons. Next he treats of the bestowal of goods, in which he presents two praiseworthy things. First, that a person be established in good things; and with regard to this he says, "He set my feet upon a rock," that is, my affections by which I must proceed on the spiritual way. The rock is called the foundation of divine help: 2 Sam. 22: "The Lord is my rock." Or the rock is called Christ: 1 Cor. 10: "And the rock was Christ." And thus he established me upon the rock, that is, upon divine help. Or upon Christ, "my feet," that is, my affections. The second is that one advance in good things; and with regard to this he says, "And he directed my steps," that is, he guided me toward better things: Prov. 16: "The heart of a man plans his way, but it is the Lord who directs his steps." Next he gives thanks: as if to say, this very thing--that we praise--is beyond my powers, because it is greater than all praise; hence to praise God worthily is from God, that is, he himself "put a new song in my mouth": 2 Cor. 13: "Do you seek proof of Christ who speaks in me?" "A new song," that is, about new benefits; and these are: namely the work of the incarnation: Jer. 31: "The Lord has created a new thing upon the earth: a woman shall compass a man." Likewise, a new mode of liberation: Heb. 9: "By his own blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption." And the Lord put a new song in my mouth, because a new song, that is, the new covenant: Is. 55: "I will make with you an everlasting covenant, the faithful mercies of David": Rev. 14: "No one could sing the song except those hundred and forty-four thousand," because a new king, a new law, new joys. The people of the old covenant sang old songs: an eye for an eye, a life for a life. They also descended to the underworld, because the gate of the kingdom was closed to them, with the Cherubim forbidding entry to Paradise, in whose hand was a sharp sword. But all people of the new law sing a new song, which the new man Christ brought: Rev. 21: "Behold, I make all things new." The new people, therefore, sing new things: namely of the incarnation of the Lord, of the resurrection, of the ascension, of the nativity, and other things of this kind. Hence at these principal solemnities, the ministers of the Church, vested in white or silken vestments, sing and read, so that no one who has not been made new should presume to sing the new song. A song, I say, not of vanity, not of shameful things, but one that pleases God; hence he says, "A hymn," or a song that pleases "our God," that is, praise to God: Ps. 64: "A hymn is fitting to you, O God, in Zion": Eph. 5: "Singing and making melody in your hearts to God."

[87197] "Many shall see." Here the benefit in others is presented, namely in the conversion of others. And first he presents the benefit itself. Second, he presents its fruit, at "Blessed is the man." Here is the order of conversion. First, it is necessary that a person see that to which he ought to be converted; hence he says, "Many shall see," namely Christ born. Many of the earlier peoples who awaited him saw: Bar. 3: "Afterward he was seen upon the earth and conversed with men." Simeon saw him, who received him in the temple, and many others: Lk. 2: "My eyes have seen your salvation." And Lk. 10: "Many kings and prophets desired to see what you see, and did not see." Or, many saw the miracles of Christ: Lk. 5: "We have seen marvelous things today." And this either through faith or through the eyes. Second, it is necessary that one fear him to whom one ought to be converted; hence he says, "And they shall fear": Sir. 1: "He who is without fear cannot be justified, because the fear of the Lord drives out sin." Third, there is hope: Rom. 8: "For in hope we have been saved." For unless hope accompanied fear, a person would flee from God. And therefore it is necessary that there be a fear by which one flees sin, and a hope by which one draws near to God. The fruit will be beatitude; hence he says, "Blessed is the man whose hope is the name of the Lord." And first the fruit is presented, which is beatitude, and to whom it is owed, namely to those who cling to God. And therefore he first presents the true opinion and excludes the false. The true opinion is that beatitude is only in those who have hope in him: Is. 30: "Blessed are all who wait for him"; and therefore he says, "Blessed is the man whose hope is the name of the Lord." This name, Jesus, is the true hope, because in him is salvation. Hence that person is blessed who does not expect temporal things from him, but the eternal salvation which his name indicates. Hence those who await the salvation of God are beatified. Or, "Blessed is the man whose hope is the name of the Lord," that is, whose hope is the invocation of the name of the Lord: Ps. 19: "Some trust in chariots and some in horses; but we invoke the name of the Lord our God." The false opinion is that beatitude consists in temporal things or in the worship of idols; and he excludes this when he says, "He has not looked upon vanity," that is, upon temporal things and pleasures--in which are included all things pertaining to pleasures and temporal goods: Eccl. 1: "Vanity of vanities," etc. The second he excludes when he says, "Nor upon false madness," that is, the worship of idols, in which certain false things were fabricated, such as that men would become gods. Likewise, there were many wanton practices and impurities and cruelties exercised there: Wis. 14: "While they rejoice, they go mad." Likewise, they were false because they were based on falsehood and not founded upon divine power, which did not befit them: Amos 3: "Assemble upon the mountains of Samaria and see the many madnesses in the midst of it." To this category belong all vain and harmful superstitions, such as necromancy, divinations, and auguries. Or, "madness" means anger, quarreling, or the vain spectacles of games.

[87198] "You have done many things." Above, the Psalmist, on behalf of Christ or the Church, set forth his confidence and its effects, namely the manifold benefits of God; here, however, he shows the cause of this confidence: namely the source from which he was moved to confess and the hope arising from merits. And so the cause of confidence is the many temporal goods, which are also certain recompenses that a person renders to God for benefits: Ps. 115: "What shall I render to the Lord?" etc. And therefore it is explained in both ways: because the merit of Christ is the cause of confidence, and the recompense of merits. And this consists in the preaching of divine truth. And concerning this he does three things. First, he proposes the meritorious act, namely the proclamation of divine works. Second, he presents the reason for proclaiming, at "Sacrifice." Third, he presents the manner, at "I have proclaimed your justice." Concerning the first he does three things. First, he shows his mercy to be abundant for proclaiming. Second, he makes manifest the cause or necessity of the proclamation, at "They have been multiplied." The matter of proclamation is abundant. And first, as to the multiplicity of divine works, because "You have done many things." Both in the works of nature: Job 9: "Who does wonders and unsearchable things": Ps. 138: "Your works are wonderful," etc. And for doing wonderful things he is in himself sufficient, because he has not been instructed by another, but by his own thoughts. Hence he says, "And in your thoughts," namely through the orderings of his wisdom: Ps. 103: "You have made all things in wisdom": Job 26: "To whom have you given counsel? Surely not to God?" Rom. 11: "Who has been his counselor?" He is great in work and sufficient. Likewise, he is excellent in both, because in the work of miracles, when he made Peter walk upon the sea, and the many other wonders that can be applied here. And no one can be compared to his works or his thoughts; hence he says, "There is none like you": Ps. 85: "Who among the gods is like you, O Lord?" etc., as to the first; Is. 55: "As the heavens are exalted above the earth, so are my ways exalted above your ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts," as to the second. Thus you have an abundant matter for preaching; hence he adds, "I have proclaimed and spoken." And he says, "I have proclaimed," in which he designates the manifestation of divine works, "and I have spoken," as if to say, I have expressed more clearly by word than by gesture. Or it designates the order of preaching. Or, "I have proclaimed," I, Christ, through the prophets, "and I have spoken," I myself in my own person: Is. 52: "I myself who was speaking, behold, I am here." The necessity of preaching was the multitude of evils, because "they have been multiplied beyond the number" of the good. And therefore, so that the wicked may be diminished and the good increased, it is necessary that the message be announced to them: Mt. 7: "Narrow is the way that leads to life, and broad is the one that leads to perdition." Or, "They have been multiplied beyond number": Eccl. 1: "The number of fools is infinite." Or otherwise, to signify the effect of preaching, that is, the good have been multiplied through preaching beyond the number estimated: Deut. 1: "May the Lord add to this number many thousands": Is. 54: "Many are the children of the desolate, more than of her who has a husband." Jerome has it differently: "You have done many things, O my God, your wonders and your thoughts for us," that is, for our salvation: Jer. 29: "I think thoughts of peace." "I have not found an order before you" (also Jerome). And this is the saying that there is none like you. And it follows: "If I wished to proclaim and recount, they are more than can be proclaimed"; as if to say, they are more than can be numbered. And thus Jerome also presents the effects of divine works when he says, "They have been multiplied beyond number."

[87199] "Sacrifice and offering you did not desire." Here he assigns the reason why he renders this recompense to God for his benefits, or why he preached. And he assigns this cause in two ways. First, he presents the divine will as the cause. Second, his own resolve, at "Then I said." Concerning the first, it should be known that in the old covenant, certain sacrifices were offered for benefits received from God; and in general there were four kinds of things that were offered to God. For every sacrifice is an offering, but not every offering is a sacrifice: because sacrifice implies the making of something sacred. Hence, when in an offering nothing else happens except that it comes into the use of the priest, it is a pure offering; when something else is done with it, for example it was burned, then it was called a sacrifice. Now in the old covenant there were three kinds of sacrifice. One was called the most worthy, which was called a holocaust. The second was a sacrifice for sin. The third was a victim, or peace offering. The first was entirely burned; and this was the most acceptable; and it is called from "holon," which means "whole." Of the sacrifice for sin, one part was burned and the other fell to the use of the priest; and nothing came to the use of the one offering, because they gave it for sin--except perhaps in two cases: either when it was offered for the sin of the priest, then the whole was burned, because nothing was done with it; likewise, when it was offered for the whole people, because among them the priest was also included. The peace offering, however, was divided into three parts: for one was offered to God, another was given to the priests, another was given to those who offered. And all these are touched upon here. He touches upon the peace offering when he says, "Sacrifice." He touches upon the simple offering when he says, "And offering you did not desire." He touches upon holocausts when he says, "Holocausts and for sin"; as if to say, you have done many benefits for me, and I wished to repay you: yet not with sacrifices and such things, because "you did not desire them" in the time of the new covenant, because then the figure ceased, and the other sacrifices were figures of the true sacrifice, namely of Christ. And therefore after Christ the temple was destroyed, and the sacrifices ceased. Hence even the Jews today observe few of those things, namely circumcisions as a sign; or, "you did not desire," that is, you did not accept them for their own sake in the good works that a person does. For certain things are acceptable to God for their own sake, such as the work of justice, charity, faith, and virtue; and this is what Deut. 10 says: "Now, O Israel, what does the Lord your God ask of you? Only that you fear the Lord your God and walk in his ways, and love him, and serve the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul." But offerings he does not accept for their own sake: Ps. 49: "Shall I eat the flesh of bulls?" etc. No. But what? Ibid.: "Offer to God a sacrifice of praise," etc. Why then were they ordained in the law? I reply: for two reasons, namely as a figure of the future sacrifice. 1 Cor. 10: "All these things happened to them as figures"; and as a precaution, so that they would not offer them to idols, the Israelites being inclined to idolatry since they lived in the midst of the nations, to which the children of Israel were prone in the beginning of the law. But in Exodus there is no mention of sacrifices except after the people fell and worshiped the calf: Jer. 7: "I did not speak to your fathers, and I did not command them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt concerning burnt offerings and victims." It is otherwise with the sacrifice of the new covenant, which contains Christ himself, who is in himself acceptable to God. "But you have fashioned ears for me." Another reading has, "a body." And thus the Apostle introduces it in Heb. 10: "But a body you have prepared for me." And the sense is this: and therefore you desired another sacrifice of the new covenant, because another sacrifice came. For you gave me a body, that I might offer it through the holy sacrifice. Or, "You have perfected," that is, you have bestowed upon me a perfect body without blemish. Or, "You have fitted," that is, you have united a body to me. Or, "You have fashioned ears for me." Or, "You have pierced them"; and this agrees with the preceding, because he prefers that we offer the sacrifice of the lips, that is, of preachings of the works of God, rather than of animals. And therefore he says, "Ears," etc.; as if to say, you require this from me, which you principally gave me, namely the capacity for perceiving wisdom. And therefore you require this so that I may show forth the wisdom which we have received for this purpose, that we may proclaim and preach: Is. 50: "The Lord has opened my ears." "And you did not ask for," that is, you did not accept, "a holocaust and a sacrifice for sin." Or, "You did not ask for" a victim even for sin: Is. 1: "The holocausts of rams and the fat of fatlings and the blood of calves and lambs and goats I did not desire." And yet, as is also said, a holocaust is acceptable to God. But when a holocaust is merely a simple sacrifice, then it is like when we do good works. If, however, all works are done for God, then it is a holocaust. And if we sometimes observe continence, it is a sacrifice; if perpetual virginity, then it is a holocaust: because works of perfection are therefore most acceptable to God. "Then I said, Behold, I come." Here he assigns the cause of the preaching of divine works from his own side, showing his resolve. And first he shows his resolve. Second, he shows it to be in conformity with the divine will, at "In the head of the book." These words someone might wish to explain of David, and connect them thus: as if to say, behold, I come, by a spiritual approach to you; and, "In the head of the book it is written of me." "As head among the tribes of Israel I have established you." But because the Apostle explains this of Christ, let us also explain it of him. And therefore when he says "Then," he designates the cause and necessity of Christ's coming: because the sacrifices of the old covenant were not acceptable to God: because Heb. 7: "The law brought nothing to perfection." And "it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins," Heb. 10. And therefore it was necessary that the true sacrifice come and be manifested. And therefore he says, "Behold, I come," namely through the incarnation. And he says "Behold," as if to say, I am at hand because of the nearness: Is. 14: "His time is near to come": Ps. 79: "Stir up your might and come." And this resolve is in conformity with the divine will; hence he says, "In the head of the book." The book is Christ. A book is an instrument in which the conceptions of the heart are contained; in Christ, however, are the conceptions of the divine intellect: Col. 2: "In him are hidden all the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God." The head of the book is God the Father: 1 Cor. 11: "The head of Christ is God." Therefore, "in the head of the book," that is, in the will of God the Father, "it is written," that is, it is ordained "of me" that I should come. Or otherwise: there is the book of predestination, which is the book of life: Ps. 68: "Let the condemned be blotted out of the book of life, or of the living." In this book all who are to be saved are written, but in order: because at the head of this book the Savior is written, and all are written through him: Rom. 8: "Whom he predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son," etc. Eph. 1: "He chose us before the foundation of the world, that we might be holy"; as if to say, it is not written of Christ as of others, but "in the head of the book." Or, "in the head of the book" of the Psalms, because the first Psalm was written about Christ: "Blessed is the man who has not walked in the counsel of the ungodly," etc. Thus he shows his resolve to come. Next he shows his resolve to obey, according to his humanity. Now there are two things principally in a person: namely the will and the intellect. The will of a person ought to be subjected to the divine will, and the intellect ought to be directed according to the law of God. And therefore he says, "O my God," Father, insofar as God. Or, "my God," insofar as man, "I have willed to do your will," which is also my will insofar as God; or, "my God," insofar as man, "I have willed to do your will," which is also my will insofar as God. Lk. 22: "Not my will, but yours be done." Likewise, my intellect is directed according to you; hence he says, "And your law in the midst of my heart"; and he says, "in the midst," because he perfectly knows the divine reasons.

[87200] "I have proclaimed your justice in the Church." Here the manner of proclaiming is presented. Three things, therefore, we ought to proclaim about divine matters: namely the works of justice, the teachings of truth, and the benefits of divine mercy; and these three things he says he has proclaimed. First, he says he has proclaimed the works of justice: "I have proclaimed your justice," which he proclaimed or preached in three ways: publicly, readily, and purely. As to the first he says, "In the great Church." Likewise, in a gathering of many: Jn. 18: "I have spoken openly to the world." Or, "in the great Church," that is, in the Catholic Church, because it is great in power and stability: Mt. 16: "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it." And great in extent: Mal. 1: "From the rising of the sun to its setting, great is your name." As to the second he says, "Behold, I will not restrain my lips"; as if to say, I will not yield to those who forbid: Acts 4: "Grant to your servants to speak your word with confidence." As to the third he says, "You know," that is, you have approved my intention: Jer. 18: "You know all their counsel." Or, "You know," that is, you predestined from eternity--with regard to Christ, when he says, "I have not hidden your justice in my heart." He confesses the teachings of truth when he says, "Your truth." This Christ confessed before Pilate. Jn. 18: "For this I was born and for this I came into the world, that I might bear witness to the truth": Prov. 8: "My throat shall meditate on truth." "And I have declared your salvation," because through the confession of truth salvation comes to a person: Joel 2: "Everyone who calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved." He confesses the benefits of mercy when he says, "I have not hidden your mercy and your truth": because mercy and truth follow one another; and therefore he says "truth." It is not placed here for the truth of doctrine, but for the truth of justice in promises: because God is truthful. Truth, however, consists in this: that he gives what he promises, because he is not otherwise our debtor except insofar as he promises.

[87201] "But you, O Lord." Above, the Psalmist commemorated the confidence he has in God with regard to past things; here, however, he presents the confidence he has in God with regard to future things, expressing it through prayer. And concerning this he does two things. First, he proposes the prayer in general. Second, in particular, at "May it please you." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he proposes the petition. Second, he assigns the reason for petitioning, at "Your mercy." He says therefore, "I have proclaimed your justice." "But you, O Lord, do not put your compassions far from me." Some already receive the compassion of God, namely those who enjoy grace and glory: Ps. 118: "The earth is full of the mercy of the Lord." Others are near, who have no impediment to mercy but some merit: Ps. 144: "The Lord is near to all who call upon him." Others are those in whom there is an impediment; therefore mercy is far from them. And therefore I ask that your compassion not be far from me on account of my demerits. And therefore the reason for this petition is twofold: one of confidence, which was conceived from the experience of divine goodness; the other of necessity, which he suffers. There are two things according to which God comes to our aid: namely mercy, insofar as he bestows upon us certain things that he has not even promised: Rom. 15: "That the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy"; and truth, when he renders either what was promised or what is due for merits. And therefore these are united together: because he always does what he has promised, or does even more abundantly. These two are necessary for a person: mercy, so that he may be drawn to the hope of glory; and truth, so that he may be confident. And this is not as though we draw God to ourselves by our merits, but God through these things draws and has drawn us. And therefore he says, "Your mercy and your truth have always sustained me." Another cause is the necessity of evils. And he presents a twofold evil: namely evils inflicted from without, and evils from within, at "My iniquities have overtaken me." As to the first he says, "For evils without number have surrounded me," namely evils that are inflicted upon me both by the world and by enemies: Ps. 117: "They surrounded me like bees"; and he says, "without number," because there are infinite dangers in the world and infinite wicked people: Eccl. 1: "The number of fools is infinite." The interior evils are sins; and these evils are dangerous in two ways: because of their gravity, since "my iniquities have overtaken me," that is, my sins have bound me by their weight: Prov. 5: "His own iniquities capture the wicked man"; "and I was not able to see": Wis. 2: "Their own malice has blinded them": Is. 59: "Your iniquities have made a division between you and your God." Likewise, they are dangerous because of their multitude. Hence he says, "They have been multiplied beyond the hairs of my head." For just as hairs are innumerable, so sins are innumerable, and especially venial sins: which, if they do not terrify because of their weight, nevertheless terrify because of their multitude. The Gloss says: if you have avoided grave sins, beware lest you be overwhelmed by sand; not that venial sins of whatever kind and however many constitute a mortal sin, but because they dispose toward it: Jas. 3: "In many things we all offend." The effect of this is the distraction of the heart: Eccl. 10: "Dying flies spoil the sweetness of the ointment." And therefore he says, "And my heart has forsaken me"; as if to say, even if they do not take away charity, they nevertheless impede fervor, and so the heart is distracted so that it is not fervent: 2 Sam. 7: "Your servant has found his heart to pray this prayer to you." Or, "My heart has forsaken me," that is, it has not thought about what is useful for me: Ps. 37: "The light of my eyes is not with me."

[87202] "May it please you, O Lord." Here the prayer is presented explicitly. And first he makes the prayer explicit with regard to himself. Second, with regard to the wicked, at "Let them be confounded." Third, with regard to the good, at "Let them exult and rejoice." With regard to himself, he asks to be rescued from evils: Sir. 51: "He delivers those who wait for him." And to be helped in obtaining good things; because through your providence, help is given to me. And this not from my merit, but from your good pleasure. Hence he says, "May it please you." The dignity of the persons is designated with regard to his adversaries when he says, "That you may rescue me" from evils, or wicked men, or sins. And note that he says, "May it please you," not distrusting in the mercy of God; as if to say, if you will, you can; and therefore he says, "Look to help me," namely in the doing of good; as if to say, look upon the penitent in their sorrow. The regard of God is our help. "Let them be confounded." Here he presents the confusion of adversaries, of whom some are capital enemies and seek to kill. Others do not seek to kill but to harm. Others seek to mock or deceive with words. And these three kinds of evils are designated here. And these things can refer either to good or to evil: because there is a twofold confusion. One confusion is good, which is through repentance; Rom. 6: "What fruit did you have then in those things of which you are now ashamed?" The other is confusion through punishment. Therefore when he says, "Let them be confounded," that is, let them be punished. And he prays this in conformity with the divine will, or justice. Or, "Let them be confounded," that is, let them repent, "and be put to shame together"; either through fear of punishments. As to the first, Wis. 17: "Since wickedness is timid, it gives testimony of condemnation." Or through fear that provokes repentance. And this because "they seek my soul," to kill it corporally. Or souls, to lead them into darkness: Gen. 14: "Give me the souls; keep the rest for yourself." He asks that the bodily enemies be impeded; hence he says, "Let them be turned backward," for good, that is, let them follow Christ behind him, Mt. 16; or for evil, that is, let them fall from their intention, so that they fail. "And let them blush who think evil things against me," that is, who rejoice at my evils: Lam. 1: "All my enemies have heard my evil; they rejoiced because you have done it." Against three enemies he asks for swiftness, because delay is usually harmful: Eccl. 8: "Because sentence against evil works is not quickly pronounced, the sons of men commit evil without any fear." And therefore he says, "Let them speedily bear their confusion," that is, let them quickly be confounded, because these are they who, applauding, say to me "Well done, well done," that is, they rejoice falsely, with regard to flatterers. Or, "Well done," that is, they mock or insult. Jerome has it according to these words: "Ha!" Thus the Jews mocked Christ, Mt. 27. For the good he asks that they rejoice at his help and liberation, and praise God. And as to the first he says, "Let all who seek you exult and rejoice." As to the second, "And let those who love your salvation say always, The Lord be magnified." Here he presents four things that befit the good. First, that they love the salvation of God, which is Christ. Lk. 2: "My eyes have seen your salvation." Second, that they seek the acts of love. Song 3: "In my bed I sought," etc. Is. 55: "Seek the Lord while he may be found." Third, that they rejoice over the beloved found; hence, "Let them exult." Hab. 3: "Yet I will rejoice in the Lord," etc. Exultation pertains to the exterior signs of joy. As to the interior, joy is, as it were, gladness and expansion of the heart. Fourth, thanksgiving and praise; hence he says, "And let them say always, The Lord be magnified," etc. Is. 12: "Exult and praise, O dwelling of Zion, for great in your midst is the Holy One of Israel."

[87203] "But I." Here the cause of the petition is presented. And first he proposes his need; second, the help of God against it is presented. He says therefore, I ask all these things because by myself I can do nothing, because I am a beggar. And this can be read in two ways. In one way, literally of Christ in his own person, who in this world, living, was both a beggar and poor. 2 Cor. 8: "You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, though he was rich, became poor for our sake, so that by his poverty you might become rich." A beggar is one who seeks sustenance from another; a poor man is one who is not self-sufficient. And both of these are said of Christ. Lk. 9: "The Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head." Or, spiritually, I necessarily beg from God the help of grace, and I am poor because the things I have are not sufficient for me. And therefore, because I recognize this, the Lord is solicitous for me. And because I am in need, "You, O Lord, be my helper." And because of the danger, "Do not delay." Mt. 15: "Lord, help me."