Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 38
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 38

[87188] The Psalmist has confessed that he suffered his affliction on account of his sin; here, however, he promises caution for the future. The title is as follows: "Unto the end, a canticle of David, for Idithun." And this is not new, although the title is new, because as is found in the history of 1 Chr. 15, when David brought back the Ark of the Covenant which had been captured by the Philistines, he appointed four thousand singers who would sing the Psalms; he placed them within, and called them Asaph, Ithamar, and Idithun, and this one is placed in the title. And as Origen says, this custom also existed among the Greeks, that if at some time there were poets who recited songs among the people, if the songs had not been composed by the reciters themselves but by others, the victory was not given to the reciter but to the poet. So it is also with the Psalms; for David composed all the Psalms, and some he himself sang before the Ark, as is found in 2 Sam. 6; others he gave to others to sing, and therefore those to whom they were given were, as it were, singers, and the Psalms are inscribed to them: both on account of their dignity, because they were prophets, and on account of their mystical significance. Hence this befits the mystery of Idithun, which is interpreted as "a man knowing inwardly," or "leaping over"; and it signifies one who leaps over the vanity of the world, about which much is treated in this Psalm. This Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. In the first he sets forth the caution he exercises to escape dangers. In the second he shows the necessity of caution, at "Behold, you have made measurable." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the caution. Second he shows the danger arising from it, at "I was dumb." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the caution. Second he gives the reason for the caution, at "I set a guard upon my mouth." In the caution three things are to be considered: namely, the resolve to be cautious; hence he says, "I said," that is, with deliberation in my heart I determined and resolved. Eccl. 2: "I said in my heart, I will go and abound in delights." Second, what he resolves is to be considered: because "I will guard my ways," that is, my courses of action. And a man ought to guard the ways of God so as to imitate them. Job 23: "My foot has followed his steps. I have kept his way and have not turned aside from it." Likewise he ought to guard his own ways lest he err. Deut. 4: "Guard your ways and your endeavors." Third, the fruit that follows from this is to be considered: "that I may not offend with my tongue." A man ought to guard himself diligently from all sins, and especially from the sin of the tongue, because he easily falls into them; for the tongue is mobile, and easily breaks forth into evil. Or another reason is that the tongue is the immediate organ for expressing the interior concept of the heart. Hence as soon as a word is in the heart, it is on the tongue; and therefore it must be diligently guarded. Next the reason for this guarding is given: "I set a guard upon my mouth, when the sinner stood against me"; as if to say: this is the reason why I guard my ways in this manner, because the adversary is always against me. Elsewhere it is said that a man should set a guard upon his heart: Prov. 4: "With all watchfulness guard your heart." Here he says that he sets a guard upon his mouth—not that it should be totally shut, but it should be guarded, that is, preserved from evil words as regards the time and as regards what he says. Eccl. 8: "For every matter there is a time and an opportunity." And why did I set a guard upon my mouth? "When the sinner stood against me." This is explained in three ways. One sense is: "against me," to lie in ambush; and then caution is more necessary. Sir. 5: "If you have understanding, answer your neighbor; but if not, let your hand be upon your mouth." Mt. 22: "to catch him in his speech." The second sense is: "against me," to injure or attack; because even then, when he attacks, you ought to guard yourself, because therein lies virtue. 1 Pet. 2: "When he was reviled, he did not revile in return." The third sense is: "Against me," that is, in my sight, so as to be instructed; and then caution is necessary lest he set forth all things to all people. For certain things are to be spoken to the just that are not to be said to sinners. 1 Cor. 3: "I could not speak to you as to spiritual persons, but as to carnal." Mt. 7: "Do not give what is holy to dogs"; as if to say: I set a guard lest I disclose the secrets of doctrine to sinners. "I was dumb." Here he sets forth the danger of caution into which one could fall; on account of which he says: seeing sinners fighting against me, I resolved to be completely silent; hence he says, "I was dumb," that is, I was utterly silent. But sometimes it happens that on account of caution a person indiscreetly keeps silent at some times; and sometimes a person is silent outwardly but is troubled inwardly. Sir. 33: "The heart of a fool is like a rushing wheel." But this man is not troubled inwardly; therefore he says, "I was humbled," namely within; but there is a danger: because while I wished to be silent from evil things, I was also silent from good things—either from good words which I did not speak, or from good people to whom I was unwilling to speak. Eph. 4: "Let no evil speech proceed from your mouth, but if any good word for the building up of faith," etc. Hence it follows: "and my sorrow was renewed"; as if to say: previously I grieved over indiscreet speech; now I grieve over indiscreet silence; as if to say: sorrow renewed itself in me. But the remedy of interior charity is applied; and therefore he says: "My heart grew hot within me," that is, the heat of charity was stirred up in my heart. Prov. 6: "Can a man hide fire in his bosom, and his garments not burn?" So it is impossible that a man should hide the words of God when his heart is inflamed with charity. Ps. 119: "Your word is a fire," etc. The cause of this stirring is meditation on divine things; hence he says: "and in my meditation a fire shall blaze forth." Nothing is loved unless it is good and beautiful. Hence in outward loves, bodily sight is the cause of love. And therefore if you wish to approach spiritual things, your heart must be kindled with the love of God. The effect of this stirring is that he who had resolved to be silent is moved to speak; hence he says, "I spoke." Acts 2: "They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak." Gregory: "The Spirit makes those whom he fills both burning and speaking." Job 4: "Who can restrain a conceived word?" Something similar is said in Jer. 20: "The word of the Lord became," etc. "And I said, I will speak no more," etc., and there follows, "and it became in my heart as a burning fire." Or it is explained according to the Gloss: "I became deaf," that is, I was made deaf. God does not give grace to a man unless he uses it; and therefore when someone through negligence does not use the grace given to him, God takes it away from him, as is clear from the parable of the talent. Lk. 19: "Take the mina from him, and give it to the one who has ten minas." And therefore he says, "I became deaf and was humbled," that is, cast down; and then it does not sound as virtue but as fault; and therefore he says, "My heart grew hot from anxiety." Origen explains it differently: "I said, I will guard my ways." Full stop. "That I may not offend with my tongue, I set a guard upon my mouth." And afterwards, "When the sinner stood against me, I was dumb." Now there are three kinds of men. Some, when placed in tribulations, curse their persecutors; some bless them; some are in the middle, who at least attain to this, that they are silent. Thus he escaped the first degree, because he set a guard upon his mouth and did not curse. But because he was dumb and did not bless, he escaped the second degree, because he felt sorrow and burned inwardly from indignation, etc.

[87189] Here he turns to God and is set ablaze. "I spoke with my tongue: Lord, make known to me my end, and the number of my days." Here a twofold petition is set forth. The first, at "Make known to me, Lord, my end." End is taken here as Christ. Rom. 10: "Christ is the end of the law." And he says, "Lord, make known to me Christ." The other petition is at "Make known to me the number of my days," that is, I wish to consider what the present life is like, so that I may compare it to that end; because these days are evil, few, and imperfect, but those are most perfect; and then it is known that "the sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the future glory that shall be revealed in us," as is said in Rom. 8. And thus, "that I may know what is lacking to me," that is, how I am imperfect for that life. Origen says that "end" is taken here for perfection. For every art has an end which it intends, which is its perfection; and thus he says, "Make known to me my end," that is, what is the highest way of perfection in which you wish me to walk. Ps. 119: "I have seen the end of all perfection." "And the number of my days": that is, my works, which are days; as if to say: make me rightly judge my works, how much they are worth. And this, "that I may know what is lacking to me," namely, from perfection. Or it can be simply explained concerning the end of life, because, as is said in Eccl. 7, "In all your works, remember your last end." "And the number of my days," etc., that is, how long I shall live, so that I may prepare myself for repentance.

[87190] "Behold, you have made my days measurable." Above, the Psalmist mentioned the caution exercised through silence, the danger threatening from silence, and the remedy by which the danger is averted; here, however, he shows the necessity of the aforementioned caution, which is drawn from the misery of the present life. And concerning this he does two things. First he describes the misery of the present life. Second, he asks for a remedy against it, at "And now, what is." Concerning the first he does two things. First he describes the misery of this life with respect to life itself. Second, with respect to life's occupation, at "Surely in an image." Concerning the first he does two things. First he describes this misery with respect to life. Second he assigns the reason, at "Surely all things." He shows the misery of this life with respect to its brevity and with respect to its weakness. As to the first he says: "Lord, I asked that you would make known to me the number of my days. But are my days numerable? Yes, because behold, you have made my days measurable." Man was so constituted that if he had never sinned, he would not die, and thus his days would not be measured; but by sinning he dies, and so they can be numbered. Job 14: "The days of man are short; the number of his months is with you." But granted that life were short, it could still be so precious that it should be highly esteemed; yet even this is nothing, because "my substance and my nature and my life are as nothing before you," that is, in comparison with you, although it may appear to be something in comparison with the lowest creatures. Is. 40: "All nations are as though they were not, so are they before him." But it can be said thus: "my substance," that is, when I consider that which is before you, that is, the eternal goods which you will give to the saints, I regard my substance as nothing. Or thus: Those who consider the things of this world before you, that is, with a divine eye, regard them as nothing.

[87191] "Surely all things." Here he assigns the reason according to the letter. "All things," according to our text, is either in the nominative case singular or in the nominative case neuter gender and plural. If in the second way, then the sense is: "Surely all things"; as if to say: it is not surprising if the life of man is nothing before you, because "all things," that is, all lower things, are vanity. And therefore Jerome has: "For all things are vanity," as being, as it were, the reason for the preceding. Eccl. 1: "All things are vanity." And they are called vanity because vanity is opposed to solidity and stability; for all things that are in the world are subject to mutability, and therefore are vain. And even among them, every living man is subject to mutability, and thus is vanity. Rom. 8: "For the creature," that is, man, "was made subject to vanity, not willingly." Or according to the letter, if "all" is in the singular, then the sense is: "All vanity," that is, every vanity, "is every man living," that is, is in every man living in a worldly manner. A man is called vain from the fact that he pursues mutable things. Jer. 2: "They walked after vanities and became vain." Or thus: "Every man living," that is, carnally, "is all," that is, complete vanity.

[87192] "Surely in an image." Here he shows the misery of the human condition with respect to occupation; and concerning this he does three things. First he shows that there is something in man that ought to resist vanity. Second he shows in general the vanity of his occupation, at "but in vain." Third he shows the same in particular, at "he heaps up treasures." He says therefore: "Every man is vanity; yet there is something fixed in man that always remains in him while he passes through; and this is the image." And this can be explained in three ways. In one way, concerning the image of God, which exists insofar as man is endowed with reason. Gen. 1: "Let us make man in our image and likeness." And this image ought to resist vanity—namely, reason—and ought to exclude it, namely vanity. And this is what he says: although man is subject to vanity, he is nevertheless always endowed with reason. But because it is not determined here whose image it is, therefore note here a twofold image: one of the heavenly man, and another of the earthly man. 1 Cor. 15: "As we have borne the image of the earthly man, let us bear also the image of the heavenly." I say therefore that every man is vanity; yet every man passes through into some image, because either through good works he represents in himself the image of the heavenly man, or through evil works the image of the earthly. Or otherwise: "Image" implies likeness. Now the course of this life is directed by some knowledge, because the affections are moved according to what is known. Now there is a twofold knowledge. One by which truth is known, and this is certain. The other is through verisimilitude, and this is, as it were, the knowledge of an image, because it does not attain to truth itself but to a likeness of truth. If man attained to truth itself as it is, he would not be troubled, because he would consider the condition of this life and what we shall be after this life, and thus he would not be occupied with this life but would tend toward the things of the other life. And therefore Jerome has: "insofar as man passes through in an image, so much is he troubled," that is, insofar as man falls short of the true knowledge of truth, so much is he troubled by the occupation of this life, whether in good things or in evil. Lk. 10: "Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things." Therefore when he does good works, he is not troubled in vain; but when he does not occupy himself with good things, then he is troubled in vain. Is. 49: "I have spent my strength in vain." And he gives an example of the occupation that troubles men, which is the occupation of avarice; this indeed most greatly troubles men. Concupiscence occupies men for a time, and similarly anger. But, as is said in Eccl. 5, "the covetous man is not satisfied with money"; and therefore concerning him he gives the example, saying, "He heaps up treasures and knows not for whom he gathers them," that is, he accumulates superfluous treasures in this life. Mt. 6: "Do not store up for yourselves treasures on earth," namely in vain and to no purpose, because you do not know for whom you are gathering them. Not for himself, because Job 27: "When the rich man falls asleep, he takes nothing with him." Therefore for others, but he does not know for whom; because sometimes he does not gather for children, because they do not survive him; and if they do survive, he nevertheless does not know what sort they will be, because sometimes they are against their parents.

[87193] "And now, what is my expectation," etc. Here he asks God's help against misery. And first he sets forth the confidence from which his prayer proceeds. Second he sets forth his prayer, at "From all my iniquities." Third he asks to be heard, at "Hear." Sometimes a man is in misery; and then either he trusts to be freed by himself, or by another. If he trusts to be freed by himself, he does not wait for another but has recourse in himself. If by another, then he waits, because he hopes to be helped by another. So it is in this misery, because his days are short, and he does not trust in himself, but says with Job 6: "Behold, there is no help for me in myself"; but he awaits help from God. Hence he says, "What is my expectation? Is it not the Lord?"; as if to say: he alone can free me, because he alone is above all truth, who alone is truth. Is. 30: "Blessed are all who wait for him." In expectation there is also delay; as if to say: I will wait. Hab. 2: "If it makes delay, wait for it." "And my substance is with you." Here is set forth the reason for the confidence he has in God. It is natural that a man should trust in the God with whom he places what he has. He therefore who places all that he has in God can trust in God. And therefore he says: "My substance is with you"; as if to say: even if in myself I am nothing, yet whatever I hope to be and whatever I have is in you. Heb. 10: "Knowing that you have a better and an enduring substance." Mt. 6: "Store up for yourselves treasures in heaven." 2 Tim. 1: "I know whom I have believed, and I am certain." The Gloss explains this of Christ. "My substance is with you," that is, you, Christ, will take from my flesh, because "he was made of the seed of David according to the flesh," Rom. 1.

[87194] "From all." Above, the Psalmist set forth the confidence he had in God when he said, "And now, what is my expectation," etc.; here, however, he sets before God his petition. And concerning this he does three things. First he asks God for the removal of guilt. Second he asks for the removal of punishment. Third he assigns the reason for the conjunction of these petitions. The second, at "Remove." The third, at "On account of iniquity." Concerning the first he does two things. First he makes his petition. Second he alleges the merit of being heard, at "You have given me as a reproach." He says therefore, "From all my iniquities," etc. Where it should be noted that this petition is commendable on account of the thing requested, which is necessary, namely to be freed from sin. Job 11: "If you put away the iniquity that is in your hand, and let not wickedness dwell in your tabernacle, then in justice you shall lift up your face without blemish." Second, because he does not ask on account of his own merits but asks that it be given him by God. Is. 43: "I am he who blots out your iniquities for my own sake." Third, because he asks to be freed from all of them; because it is impious to ask pardon from God for sins if total deliverance is not hoped for from him. Jn. 7: "I have made a whole man sound on the Sabbath." Hence he says, "From all my iniquities deliver me"; as if to say: I do not ask to be freed from one sin only, but from all. Ezek. 36: "You shall be cleansed from all your defilements." Ps. 25: "Forgive all my sins." Merit is taken from the part of the one who suffers. Tob. 3: "You forgive all the sins of men in tribulation." And therefore first he shows what he endures; second he shows the patience he had; third he assigns the cause. He says therefore, "You have given me as a reproach to the fool," which can be understood in two ways. In one way, that the reproach is a punishment inflicted on him by God, because just as the proper reward of the virtuous person is honor, so the punishment of sin is reproach. Mal. 2: "You have scandalized many in the law." In another way, that God caused it, that is, the patience, not the reproach, but the occasion of reproach from the fact that he now begins to despise earthly things, which the foolish and unwise regard as a reproach on account of the patience he exercises. The patience he had, he shows when he says, "I was dumb." A sign of patience is that when words of reproach are brought against a man, he does not return evil for evil, as Christ, 1 Pet. 2: "When he was reviled, he did not revile in return." And therefore he says, "I was dumb and did not open my mouth." And this can be referred to two things. In one way, that when he says "I did not open," he designates the continuation of patience, because although someone may seem patient for a time and be silent, afterward, having become impatient, he speaks at length. Is. 53: "He shall be led as a sheep to the slaughter, and shall be dumb as a lamb before his shearer, and shall not open his mouth." Ps. 38: "But I, as a deaf man, did not hear, and as a mute not opening his mouth"; as if to say: I had patience. Or, "I was dumb" from reproaches against my neighbor, "and I did not open my mouth" against God. The cause is, "because you have done it." And this can be referred to what is said, "a reproach." The cause for bearing injuries patiently is when he considers that this happens to him by the divine judgment. David did this when he said in 2 Sam. 16: "Let him alone, that he may curse." Prov. 3: "My son, do not reject the discipline of the Lord, nor grow weary when you are corrected by him." Or it can be referred to what he says, "I was dumb, because you have done it," namely, the patience. His second petition is about the removal of punishment. And first he sets forth the petition; second the reason for the petition. He says, "Remove from me your scourges," that is, your chastisements. And this can be explained in two ways. Either concerning bodily chastisements—and these are external, such as scourges and other adversities by which a man is chastised by God for his sins. Jer. 30: "I have struck you with the wound of an enemy." Therefore, remove these scourges from me. Likewise there are spiritual wounds, that is, interior ones, such as the remorse of conscience. Ps. 50: "I will reprove you and set it before your face." And he asks for these to be removed. According to Origen, the cause of this petition is from strength. External chastisement is very useful insofar as it is borne patiently; but when it is not borne patiently but one fails and despairs, the chastisements are harmful. 2 Cor. 2: "Console him, lest he be swallowed up by excessive sorrow." And therefore, fearing this, he asks for the scourges to be removed, because "I have failed from the force," that is, from the violence of your striking. Is. 8: "With a strong hand he instructed me." 1 Sam. 5: "The hand of the Lord was very heavy." A man fails in three ways under chastisements. One way is common to the good and the bad, which is bodily. Ps. 90: "And in your wrath we have failed." Another is the way of impatience, and this belongs to the wicked. Job 4: "Now the blow has come upon you, and you have failed." Another way belongs to the good, by which one departs from himself and tends toward God. Ps. 119: "My soul has fainted for your salvation." And in any of these ways what is said here can be understood; as if to say: therefore I ask that you remove your scourges from me, because I am corrected according to the third mode of failing; because "I have failed from the strength of your hand in reproofs." Or because I despair, according to the second mode. Or because I cannot endure, according to the first mode. Nor does it matter if it is said, according to another reading, "in reproofs I have failed," etc. "On account of iniquity you have corrected man." This is the reason why he proposes a twofold petition: because first the cause is removed, and afterward the effect is removed. Guilt is the cause of chastisements; and therefore he says that man is chastised on account of sin. Hence he says, "You have corrected," that is, chastised man, "on account of iniquity," that is, on account of his sins. And therefore first he asks for sins to be removed, because future punishments are for damnation, but the punishments of this life are for purification, as far as they go in themselves, and are for correction. Ps. 32: "Many are the scourges of the sinner." "And you have made his soul waste away like a spider." Here is set forth the manner or limit of correction: "to waste away," that is, to dry up. It can therefore be explained corporally, when it is referred to bodily tribulation, because the moisture and richness of the body is dried up, and thus life wastes away. Job 33: "His flesh shall waste away." Likewise there: "His flesh is consumed by punishments." In another way, it can be referred to the soul. In man there is spiritually a twofold richness. One is evil, through bodily pleasures. Deut. 32: "He grew fat, and forsook God his maker." And to be dried from this richness is good; and this is what he says: "You have made to waste away," that is, you have dried up my soul like a spider, from the love of carnal things; because the spider is a hot animal and is not fat, because it makes the finest threads; so the soul, separated from carnal pleasures, clings through its affection to invisible things and produces invisible works and affections. 2 Cor. 4: "While we look not at the things which are seen," etc. Or, "to waste away," that is, to dry up from the richness of devotion, as Ps. 63 says: "Let my soul be filled as with marrow and fatness"; and this is a bad drying up. This happens because the soul becomes undevout and clings to sins and lacks the richness of devotion like a spider. Likewise the web of the spider is fragile, and so the thoughts of sinners are vain. Is. 59: "They have woven webs of spiders," that is, useless and vain things, "they have made." Likewise the spider emits so much of those threads that it dies; so men die spiritually on account of the sins they commit. Jas. 1: "Sin, when it is completed, begets death." And it is read thus: "His soul, being like a spider, you have made to waste away," that is, to dry up with a good drying. "Surely every man is troubled in vain." Here is the failure of correction; because although he makes them waste away in this manner, nevertheless many remain in their malice or return to evil. And that some are not troubled in vain, this is not insofar as they are men, but insofar as they are elevated by God from earthly things to the contemplation of heavenly things.

[87195] "Hear my prayer, O Lord, and my supplication," etc. Here he asks that his petition be admitted, where he asks to be heard. And he sets forth three things that make a petition acceptable to God. The first is the elevation of the mind to God, and this is prayer, which is the ascent of the mind to God; hence he says, "Hear my prayer, O Lord." Ps. 69: "But I direct my prayer to you, O Lord." The second is the continuance of asking, and this when he says, "and my supplication." Jas. 5: "The continual prayer of a just man avails much." The third is the abundance of tears, and he shows this when he says, "Give ear to my tears." "Be not silent." Here is set forth a sign of being heard; hence he asks that God not be silent. Now God is sometimes said to be silent with regard to the wicked, when he does not punish them, as is said in Is. 42: "I have been silent, I have always kept still, I have been patient," etc. "Be not silent," that is, do not refrain from punishment. Likewise sometimes he is silent by not consoling the good; and thus he says, "Be not silent" to my soul, but "say to my soul: I am your salvation," Ps. 35. And God does this in this life when he says to the sinner: "Your sins are forgiven you," Lk. 5. And also in the future, when he will say, "Come, blessed of my Father," etc., Mt. 25. Jerome has: "Do not be deaf to my tears," and this is connected with the preceding. "For I am a stranger with you." Here he assigns the reason for his petition; as if to say: God commanded this, Ex. 22, namely that strangers should be heard. And because I am a stranger, it is just that you hear me. I have left the world and have fled to you, and I am with you as a stranger, because in this world I do not have a lasting dwelling, but I am as a pilgrim tending elsewhere, namely to the homeland of eternal life, "as all my fathers were." For many are strangers in this world, not having affection for worldly things. "As all my fathers," namely the saints who were pilgrims, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5: "Having food and wherewith to be covered, with these let us be content," 1 Tim. 6. "Forgive me." Here he asks for the hastening of his being heard; as if to say: let what I ask be done quickly. And first he sets forth the effect of the petition; second he determines the time. Hence he says, "Forgive me," namely my sins, because (Ps. 32), "Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven and whose sins are covered." And this so that here I may "be refreshed," namely from sin, or from the punishment that the evil one intends. Wis. 4: "But the just man, if he be taken by death, shall be in refreshment." And do this, namely forgive me, "before I depart," that is, before I withdraw from this world, because there is no remission there. Job 10: "Before I go, and return no more, to the land of darkness," etc. "And I shall be no more." This can be understood in two ways. In one way thus: forgive, etc., because after I have departed, I shall no longer be in a state where sins can be forgiven. Job 7: "My eye shall not return to see good things," namely present things. In another way thus: forgive, etc., because if I depart from this world unless you have forgiven my sins, I shall no longer be in a good state of being. Job 18: "Let his companions dwell in his tabernacle, who are not."
