Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 48
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 48

[87261] Above, the Psalmist invited the nations to joy and thanksgiving for the benefits given to the people of God; here, however, he admonishes them to trust in God. And concerning this he does two things. First, he arouses attention. Second, he pursues his purpose. The title is not new. According to the title, however, a person is rendered attentive in two ways. In one way someone is said to be rendered attentive on the part of the hearers; in another way on the part of the things to be said, when he promises to say certain great things. Prov. 8: "Hear me, for I will speak of great things." And in this manner he speaks here. First, therefore, he renders them attentive on the part of those to whom he was speaking. Second, on the part of the things to be said, at "My mouth." He says, therefore, that the things he is about to say pertain to every rank of men and to all. And he touches on four differences among men. One from the diversity of peoples, because the people of the Jews was one, and that of the Gentiles another. Another on the part of places. Another on the part of origin. For some were noble and distinguished, others were not. Another on the part of fortune, because some were rich, others were not. He sets forth the first when he says, "Hear these things, all you nations," not only of the Jews, because these things pertain to all to hear; and this is necessary. Prov. 1: "The wise man hearing," etc. He sets forth the second when he says, "Give ear, all you inhabitants of the world," that is, from whatever part of the world. And he says "give ear," because one must both hear and perceive. Mt. 13: "He who has ears to hear, let him hear," that is, let him attend. Jerome has, "inhabitants of the west." As though it were a certain prophecy, because the faith of Christ flourishes especially among the people of the west, since in the north there are still many pagans, and in the east there are many schismatics and unbelievers. Or, "hear these things, all you nations" refers to the wicked; "you inhabitants of the world," to the good who have dominion over the earth. He sets forth the third when he says, "all you who are earth-born," that is, the ignoble, "and sons of men," that is, the noble. Jerome has, "both sons of Adam and sons of individuals," because some have nothing distinguished from their parents. Mystically, the "earth-born" are called sinners, who cling to the earth through affection; hence they are compared to the serpent. Is. 65: "For the serpent" (that is, for the earthly), "dust shall be his bread." "Sons of men" are called the good, who bear the image of God and of Christ, who is the Son of Man. He sets forth the fourth when he says, "rich and poor together as one"; as if to say: let all of you hear these teachings, because they are useful for all. And what are they? Mt. 5: "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Sir. 31: "Blessed is the rich man who is found without blemish," etc. Yet someone may be rich in fact but not in affection, and such a person can be holy, like Abraham and King Louis of France. Another is rich both in fact and in affection, and such a person is not holy. Of this it is said, Mt. 19: "It is easier for a camel to enter," etc., because just as it is against nature for a camel to enter through the eye of a needle, so for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven is against divine justice. And such people are earth-born; but the former are sons of men.

[87262] "My mouth." Here he renders them attentive through the promise of the things to be said. Whoever teaches, either teaches things or teaches words. When we preach faith and morals, we teach things; when we expound Scripture, we teach words. First, therefore, he speaks of the first kind of teaching. Second, of the second, at "I will incline." But the knowledge of things is necessary for two purposes: namely, for the knowledge of truth and for use in action. Every knowledge of truth, therefore, that is necessary for us concerning other things, must be referred to the knowledge of the truth of divine things. Hence Augustine says: whoever examines these things without referring them to eternal things is idle. And therefore all knowledge of truth pertains to wisdom; and therefore he says, "My mouth shall speak wisdom." 1 Cor. 2: "We speak wisdom among the perfect." But that which is necessary with respect to use in action pertains to prudence, by which there is direction of human affairs; and therefore he says, "and the meditation of my heart shall speak prudence." Prov. 10: "Wisdom is prudence for a man," because wisdom applied to human and material things is prudence. "I will incline." Here he treats of the second kind of teaching, namely of obscure words; and two things are necessary concerning them. First, that one study to understand. Second, that one study to explain them to others. With respect to the first he says, "I will incline my ear to a parable." A parable is a certain saying when it has an obscure similitude; as if to say: I will devote study to understanding the sayings of others. Prov. 1: "He will observe the parable and its interpretation, the words of the wise and their riddles." Or, "I will incline my ear to the parable" which God speaks, because he speaks enigmatically; as if to say: I will incline my understanding to the voice of the Lord, who speaks parabolically. "I will open on the Psaltery my proposition." "Proposition" is said in two ways. In one way it means that which I desire above other things, and it is that which I most desire; "I will open it on the Psaltery," that is, in my action, because this is the best way to open one's intention; for if you propose to enter eternal life, you do not manifest your intention if you do not have good works. Or "proposition" is an obscure saying, or one proposed for the sake of testing; thus Samson, Judg. 14, proposed a riddle; hence he says, "If you had not plowed with my heifer"; and so "proposition" is taken here. And therefore Jerome says that it is an obscure saying. The Hebrews have, "my divination," which is the same thing.

[87263] "Why shall I fear?" Having set forth the introduction of the Psalm in which he aroused the attention of the people, here he proceeds to the principal purpose, which is to lead men not to fear present evils, nor to trust in present goods, but that their fear and trust should be in God alone. And concerning this he does two things. First, he shows what is to be feared. Second, he shows what they should not fear, at "Do not fear." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he proposes his intention. Second, he proves his proposition, at "Those who trust." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he proposes the question. Second, he sets forth the conclusion. The question is, "Why shall I fear in the evil day?" Here, first, it must be seen what this evil day is, because all days are from God. But they are called evil on account of the evils that occur in them. Eph. 5: "Redeeming the time, because the days are evil." The evil day can therefore be called the day on which some peril occurs, and especially that on which the peril of eternal damnation threatens, and this is the day of judgment. Zeph. 1: "The voice of the day of the Lord is bitter; the strong man shall be in tribulation there." Therefore, "Why shall I fear in the evil day?" That is, what shall make me fear in that day? And he answers, "The iniquity of my heel shall surround me." For nothing is to be feared except sin, because no adversity shall harm if no iniquity holds sway. Prov. 28: "The wicked man flees when no one pursues." Sir. 34: "He who fears God shall tremble at nothing." And therefore he says, "the iniquity of my heel." By "heel" three things can be understood. First, because it is the lowest part of the body. And therefore "the iniquity of my heel" is the iniquity that persists until the end of life; and in this way "heel" is taken in Gen. 3: "She" (namely, the woman) "shall crush your head," namely, the higher reason; but she shall crush the head of the serpent, "and you shall lie in wait for her heel," that is, you shall lie in wait for her until the end of life. Likewise, by "heel" can be understood the weakness of the flesh, because when a man fails, the heel slips. And thus "the iniquity of the heel," that is, the sin proceeding from the weakness of the flesh, "shall surround me." Third, unjust persecution, which one moves against another, according to Jn. 13: "He who eats my bread shall lift up his heel against me." And thus "the iniquity of the heel," that is, unjust persecution, is turned back against the persecutor. Prov. 5: "His own iniquities catch the wicked man." "Those who trust in their own strength." Here is set forth the reason why there is cause for fear, namely on account of sin. And there is a twofold reason why sin should be feared. First, on account of the impossibility of escaping the punishment of sin. Job 11: "Refuge shall perish from them, and their hope shall be the abomination of the soul." The other reason is on account of the evils that threaten the wicked. First, therefore, he sets forth the impossibility of escaping punishment. Second, he shows the evils threatening the wicked, at "He shall not see." Someone escapes punishments, first, through extrinsic help; second, through his own solicitude; third, through the failure of the subject, as when he dies. And he shows that by none of these means can one escape. First, on account of help. Second, that neither through a remedy provided by oneself. Third, that neither through the failure of the subject. He who wishes to be freed through help is sometimes freed by the power of his army. Jn. 18: "If my kingdom were of this world, my servants," etc. Sometimes through riches. Prov. 6: "He will hand over all the substance of his house and free himself." Sometimes through friends. And he shows that none of these can free from the punishment of sin. And although according to the Gloss it is read differently, yet according to the Hebrews it is read that God frees those who trust in him. "A brother will not redeem"; as if to say: a brother will not redeem those who trust in him. And therefore first he shows that one is not helped against the punishment of sin by the help of friends, because the power of friends is small. And therefore one should not trust in the bodily strength of friends. Hence he says, "Those who trust in their own strength," namely that of their friends, or in their own special strength, because "there is a way that seems right to a man, but its end leads to death," Prov. 14. Likewise, those who trust in the strength of their riches are not freed from the punishment of sin by all these things, because Prov. 11: "Those who trust in their riches shall fall." For one should not trust in bodily or spiritual riches, but a man should seek his salvation as best he can. Jer. 9: "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, and let not the strong man glory in his strength, and let not the rich man glory in his riches." Nor can a person closely related to him, no matter how closely, redeem him, that is, free him from sin or from punishment. Ezek. 14: "If these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in its midst, they by their justice would deliver their own souls." But since a brother cannot redeem someone however closely related, shall a man redeem? No, because a man cannot snatch anyone from the hand of God, but God alone shall redeem them. And a man, namely Christ: a man, so that the price, that is, death, might have a place in him, and God so that he might have the power to redeem. Or, differently: "brother," that is, Christ, who is our true brother. Ps. 21: "I will declare your name to my brothers." Song 8: "Who will give you to me for a brother?" etc. If this one does not redeem, who else will redeem? As if to say: no one. "He will not give God his appeasement." Here he shows that they do not escape punishment on account of anything they do while they are in sin, because sinners need a twofold remedy on account of the twofold evil they incur, namely the offense against God and the debt of punishment. And therefore they need to appease God, which they themselves cannot do, because since they do not please God and are enemies of God, neither does he accept their offerings. Hence he says, "He will not give God his appeasement," because exterior things do not please God unless there is interior grace, which a mere man cannot give. Likewise, they need to be absolved from punishment; and this too a man cannot do. Hence he says, "Nor can he give the price of the redemption of his soul," namely, a mere man; and therefore he cannot free from punishment. Ps. 88: "What man is he who shall live and not see death, and shall deliver his soul from the hand of Hell?" But Christ, who is God and man, gave appeasement for us. Rom. 5: "When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God," etc. Likewise, the price of redemption alone: 1 Pet. 1: "You were redeemed from your vain manner of life," etc. Or, "he will not give," that is, he will not care to give appeasement and the price of the redemption of his soul, namely he who trusts in riches. And according to this the other reading can be continued, which says: "A brother," namely Christ, does not redeem, because they do not care to appease God through penance, because Christ does not help those who do not wish to help themselves. "And he shall labor." Here he shows that he will not escape through the failure of himself, because he is always punished. Hence he says, "He shall labor forever," that is, he shall be punished with eternal punishment. Mt. 25: "These shall go into everlasting punishment," because they did not wish to labor here. Ps. 72: "They are not in the labor of men." And because, as far as it was in them, they sinned forever, because they preferred sin to the law of God; and therefore they do not fear punishment, but would always wish to commit sin. "And he shall still live unto the end," that is, his life shall not fail in punishments. Job 20: "He shall suffer for all that he has done, yet he shall not be consumed."

[87264] "He shall not see." Above, the Psalmist showed that there is cause to fear on account of sin, because there is no remedy for escaping punishment; here, however, he treats of the evils that threaten them on account of their improvidence. And concerning this he does three things. First, he commemorates their improvidence regarding future evils. Second, he commemorates the evils that threaten, at "They shall leave to strangers." Third, he sets forth the hope in God by which he hopes to be freed from these evils, at "Nevertheless." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he shows their improvidence. Second, the cause of their ignorance, at "When he shall see." He says, therefore, that such a person to whom so many evils threaten "shall not see," that is, shall not consider "destruction," that is, his own damnation. For it belongs to the just to remember their last end, Sir. 7. But of these it is said, Dt. 32: "A nation without prudence and without counsel." And why do the unjust not provide for themselves? The reason is given in Eccl. 9: "This is the worst among all things that are done under the sun: that the same things happen to all." And therefore they do not consider what may befall them in the future. And therefore, "when he shall see even the wise dying"; but seeing bodily death, they do not consider their glory. Wis. 4: "They shall see the end of the wise man and shall not understand what God has designed for him." There is a difference between the foolish and the stupid. The foolish man is one who has human knowledge but does not consider eternal things; the stupid man is one who does not consider even present things. Or the foolish man is one who does not attend to present evils but to future ones; the stupid man is one who attends to them but does not avoid them. Hence he says, "The foolish and the stupid shall perish together." According to Jerome, there is a twofold cause of the contempt of the unjust: length of life, and the fact that they see the wise and the foolish die together.

[87265] "And they shall leave." Here he sets forth the evils that befall sinners. And first he sets forth the evils that occur in the present. Second, he sets forth the evils that will come in the future, at "Like sheep." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he sets forth the evils that occur in the present with respect to extrinsic goods. Second, with respect to intrinsic goods, at "When he was in honor." And he shows first what the wicked man loses through death. He says that he loses riches; hence he says, "They shall leave their riches to strangers." Jer. 17: "He has made riches, and not by judgment; in the midst of his days he shall leave them." And he says, "their own," as if possessed by themselves; or because he did not use them for the benefit of others. Phil. 2: "All seek the things that are their own." And he says, "to strangers," because often strangers, that is, those unrelated according to the flesh, receive their riches. Ps. 38: "He stores up treasure and knows not for whom he gathers it." Even if sometimes he leaves riches to his children, they are nevertheless strangers, as is said in Lk. 10: "That one is a neighbor who showed mercy to him." And it happens that children and grandchildren do nothing good for the dead; but two things remain for them of the things of the world: a tomb and human reputation. The second, at "Their dwellings." With respect to the first he says: they had houses and vineyards and chariots and many precious things. But what shall they have in death? In place of a palace they shall have a tomb, and this "forever," that is, until the day of judgment they shall dwell in their tombs. Or, from the fact that they build elaborate tombs, they believe they shall dwell in them forever; but they are deceived, because even the tombs shall be destroyed. Hence, although according to their opinion those tombs are their houses forever, yet it is not so. Jerome, however, has it differently: "Their inward parts are their houses forever," because a man has a twofold house: an exterior one, and this does not remain forever; and an interior one, namely the conscience, and this remains. Is. 38: "Set your house in order." Whether good or evil, it always remains. "Their dwellings." Here he shows that neither fame nor anything memorable of a man remains after death. The memorable things of a man are strong buildings; therefore he says, "their dwellings from generation to generation"; as if to say, they are built as if they will last forever; but they are deceived, because they are destroyed. Job 21: "Where is the house of the prince, and where are the dwellings of the wicked?" Mk. 13: "Do you see these great buildings? There shall not be left," etc. And he says "dwellings," because they do not remain in them for long. "They have called their names upon their lands"; as if to say: this is the intention of this building, that they might be named in their lands. Gen. 11: "Come, let us build a city and a tower, and let us make a name," etc. Sir. 40: "The building of a city establishes a name." Hence they call cities by their own name. And he says "their own," because the name of anyone does not extend much beyond his own land. And therefore it is foolish for a man to celebrate his name in his lands. Or, "they will call their names," that is, of the deceased, "upon their lands," by carrying food to their tombs.

[87266] "And man." Above, the Psalmist set forth the evils that threaten the wicked with respect to the loss of exterior goods; here, however, he sets forth those that threaten them from the corruption of interior goods. And concerning this he does two things. First, he proposes the evil of interior corruption. Second, he shows what follows from this evil, at "This is their way." It should be known that man is composed of a rational and a sensitive nature. According to his rational nature, man has a likeness to God and the Angels. Gen. 1: "Let us make man in our image and likeness." Ps. 8: "You have made him a little less than the Angels." But according to his sensitive nature, he shares in common with beasts. First, therefore, he sets forth the honor of man with respect to the fact that he has a likeness to the Angels; hence he says, "Man, when he was in honor." According to the Philosopher, honor is something more excellent than praise, because praise is ordered to something else, whereas honor is in and of itself. And he says "he was," namely like God. And from the fact that he possesses these things, he sets forth three things: first, that he does not consider these things, namely that he is like God. Second, that he declines into bestial ignorance and baseness. Third, that he falls into bestial acts. With respect to the first he says, "He did not understand," namely that he was made in the image of God, and that he was fit to possess heavenly things. Wis. 2: "Nor did they hope for the reward of justice, nor did they judge the honor of holy souls." With respect to the second he says, "He is compared to senseless beasts." Brute animals act from passion; and this is evident, because a dog immediately when it is angry, barks; a horse, when it desires, neighs; but this is not imputed to them, because they lack reason. If, therefore, a man immediately when he desires follows his passion, and when angry strikes, he is compared in his action to senseless beasts. Ps. 31: "Do not become like the horse and mule," etc. With respect to the third he says, "And he is made like them." For when the nature of brutes is inclined toward something, it uses passion in that way, and custom turns into nature. When a man, therefore, becomes accustomed to living according to passion, it already turns into nature; and therefore "he is made like them" through a habit aggravated by evil works. Jer. 5: "They are become like horses mad for females and stallions." And therefore the Philosopher says that a wicked man is worse than a wicked beast, because together with his malice he has an intellect to devise various evils.

[87267] "This is their way." Here he shows what follows from this evil that they have incurred, namely that they have become bestial; for someone could say that no evil follows from it. But it is not so. Rather, something else follows. And first he shows what follows with respect to them. Second, with respect to others. With respect to them he says, "This way," namely of following passions, "is a scandal to them," because they are interiorly disturbed. Ps. 68: "Let their table before them become a stumbling block." Likewise, they are also exteriorly disturbed, because they are punished and defamed. The Philosopher says: "The wicked are filled with repentance." With respect to others it follows that "afterwards they shall please with their mouth." And this is explained in two ways. In one way thus: after they are interiorly scandalized and do evil, they wish that others would follow them. And therefore they strive to please others, so as to draw them to sin. Prov. 1: "If sinners entice you," etc. In another way, it reproves simulation: as if to say, after they are already thus disturbed and follow evil, "they shall please with their mouth," that is, they strive to speak holy and smooth words. Mt. 23: "Woe to you, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, who are like whitewashed sepulchres," etc., up to "and iniquity." The Gloss: "Those who simulate are worse than the openly wicked." But is this true? It seems not. Is. 3: "They have proclaimed their sin like Sodom." Jerome's Gloss: "A second plank of salvation is to sin in secret." It must be said that it is one thing not to publicize a sin, and another thing to simulate innocence; for to publicize sin is evil because it scandalizes others; but to simulate innocence in order to draw others to sin is a greater evil. And it is of these that he speaks here. Another reading has, "And with their mouth they shall bless God." And it is explained thus: although they are interiorly beasts, yet with their lips they outwardly bless God. Is. 29: "This people honors me with their lips," etc. Or, differently: they shall bless God for the evil things they have done. Jerome has, "After them their justices shall run"; as if to say: he did not understand, and was made like beasts, and from this they are scandalized, and so it happens because they wished to be beasts. Therefore, "after them," that is, in the end, they shall be devoured by beasts, that is, by demons; as if to say: they shall run after the demons in Hell.

[87268] "Like sheep." Here he sets forth the evils that will befall sinners after this life. And because he has already spoken of three evils -- namely, that they are like beasts, that they despise wisdom, and the third is that they trust in their own strength -- against the first he says: because these are like beasts, it is fitting that they be punished like beasts. Hence he says, "Like sheep they are placed in Hell." Sheep have no help from nature to defend themselves, and therefore they are exposed to slaughter. Ps. 43: "We are regarded as sheep for the slaughter." Because, therefore, the wicked in Hell are wholly exposed to punishments, they are like sheep. Jer. 12: "Gather them together like a flock for the slaughter." Likewise, sheep are shorn, and once shorn, they are killed; so the wicked are first shorn of their wool, and deprived or stripped of exterior goods, and afterwards killed in Hell. "Death shall feed upon them." Rev. 21: "Their portion is sulfur." Here, "Death shall feed upon them"; and he says "feed upon," because although death inflicts punishment, yet it does not totally remove them, but always preserves them for further punishment. Or "death," that is, the Devil -- Rev. 6: "His name is Death" -- "shall feed upon them," that is, shall lead them from pasture to pasture, that is, from punishments to punishments. Job 24: "From the waters of snow he shall pass to excessive heat." Another reading has, "Death shall be their shepherd." And he speaks thus: in this life they are like sheep destined for Hell, and the Devil is their shepherd. "And they shall have dominion." This is against what he said above, that the wise seem to die together with the foolish. Here he says that the just shall have dominion over them, namely over the wicked. Or the wise, who are called just, in the morning, that is, on the day of judgment, when they shall receive judiciary power. Mal. 4: "You shall trample the wicked when they are ashes under the soles of your feet." "And their help." This is what he said above: "and in the multitude of their riches," etc. As if to say: their help, which came from their friends and their riches, "shall grow old," that is, shall perish in Hell. Is. 10: "To whose help shall you flee?" Job 6: "Behold, there is no help for me in myself." "From their glory," that is, in proportion to their glory. Rev. 18: "As much as she glorified herself, so much," etc. "Nevertheless, he shall redeem my soul"; as if to say: the wicked have those things; but I shall be freed from them. And by what? Through the shedding of the blood of Christ. "He shall redeem from the hand of Hell," that is, from the hand of the Devil, under whom men were before the coming of Christ. Hos. 13: "From death I will redeem them." "When he shall receive me," that is, when he shall receive my soul. Heb. 2: "Nowhere does he take hold of Angels, but of the seed of Abraham."

[87269] "Do not fear." Above, the Psalmist showed what is to be feared in the world by man; here he shows what is not to be feared, namely the prosperity of the wicked. And first he admonishes that we should not fear on account of the prosperity of the wicked; second, he assigns the reason, at "For when he shall die." The prosperity of the wicked has two things: namely, abundance of riches and sublimity of glory. With respect to the first he says, "Do not fear when a man is made rich." With respect to the second, "and when the glory of his house is multiplied." And he says "man." Man consists of a twofold nature: namely, animal and rational. And sometimes it is taken for the one, sometimes for the other. Here it is taken for animality; as if to say: if an animal man is made rich -- for such men are often enriched. Job 21: "Why do the wicked live, are they exalted, and strengthened with riches?" Likewise, Job 12: "The dwellings of robbers abound." If you see these things, do not fear. There can be a twofold cause of fear. One, lest they rage against men; the other, lest the good be scandalized by this and fail in hope, according to Ps. 72: "My feet were almost moved (...). And I said: Therefore, without cause have I justified my heart"; as if to say: since God bestows so many goods upon the wicked, it seems that he does not care about us, according to Mal. 3: "He is vain who serves God, and what profit have we that we have kept his commandments?" With respect to the second he says, "and when the glory of his house is multiplied." Sir. 9: "Do not envy the glory and the work of a sinner." Ps. 36: "I saw the wicked," etc. "For when he shall die." Here the reason is assigned why the wicked are not to be feared if they become rich. First, because at some point they shall be deprived of all exterior goods; second, they shall also fail in all interior goods. The second is at "For his soul." Therefore he says, they are not to be feared, because God reserves greater things for you. But these things that are given to them are transitory. And he shows, first, that riches pass away, saying, "For when he shall die," namely the rich man, "he shall not take all things," that is, he shall be able to have nothing of all the things he had. Job 27: "When the rich man shall sleep, he shall take nothing with him." 1 Tim. 6: "We brought nothing into this world, and doubtless we can take nothing out." Second, he shows the failure of the glory of the sinful man: "Nor shall his glory descend with him," because then his glory ends with his flesh, and ignominy is reserved for him in Hell. Hos. 4: "I will change their glory into shame." Rev. 18: "She glorified herself," etc.

[87270] "For his soul in his lifetime shall be blessed; he will praise you when you do well for him." Here he sets forth, first, the failure of interior goods pertaining to the body; second, pertaining to the soul, at "And he shall enter." First, therefore, he shows that after this life the good of the body fails them; second, he shows that the good of virtue, if they had any, comes to an end. He says, therefore, "For his soul." Just as "man" is sometimes taken for the animal nature, sometimes for the rational, so "soul" is taken in two ways. Sometimes for the rational life, as in Dt. 6: "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul." Sometimes for the animal life. Lk. 12: "My soul, you have many goods," etc. He says, therefore, according to this: "For his soul," that is, his animal life, "in his lifetime shall be blessed"; as if to say: whatever he has of riches and glory, all of it is in this life; and when this life ceases, his glory fails. And therefore he cannot bless his life except while he lives. Likewise, sinners sometimes praise God, or do works that are generically good; but if adversity threatens, their praise or good work ceases. And therefore he turns to God saying: O God, this one, namely the sinner, or someone existing in prosperity, "shall praise you when you do well for him," that is, when you give him the temporal goods that he loves. Prov. 10: "The blessing of the Lord makes rich." Jerome: "They will praise you when it is well with them," that is, men praise and serve the rich as long as they are supplied and prosper in riches; but if fortune changes, they change -- not only do they not praise, but they detract from them. "He shall enter." Here he sets forth the failure of spiritual goods. And first he shows the failure; second, he sets forth the order of arriving at this failure, at "Man." And first he sets forth the failure of guilt; second, of punishment. With respect to the first he says, "He shall enter," namely this sinner, so rich and whom all praise while it is well with him -- he shall enter, I say, "even to the generation of his fathers," namely by imitation, since he performs all the evils that his entire lineage committed. Mt. 23: "And you, fill up the measure of your fathers." Jer. 11: "They have returned to the iniquities of their earlier fathers." Or, "he shall enter," etc., because his fathers are wicked and are in Hell, and he shall go there. With respect to the second he says, "And even to eternity he shall not see the light." Because since here in his eternity, namely in his life, he did not wish to follow the light of reason, therefore he shall not see the light for eternity. Job 15: "He does not believe that he can return from darkness to light." Mt. 25: "Cast the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness," etc. And in what order? Because when he was endowed with the light of reason, as a man placed in honor, he did not wish to be ruled by that light; he was made like senseless beasts, and therefore, since he acts like the beasts, he must be consigned to slaughter.