Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 44
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 44

[87232] Above, the Psalmist proposed a prayer for the adversity of the kingdom and the king; here he sets forth, as it were, the glory of the king and the kingdom from the divine benefit. And first, he sets forth the divine benefit. Second, he invites other nations from this example to serve God, at "all peoples." Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth the glory of the king and the magnificence of the kingdom. Second, he sets forth the peace of the kingdom, at Ps. 45: "God is our refuge." This Psalm is called an epithalamium. For it was the custom that at weddings certain canticles were sung in praise of the bridegroom and the bride, and these are called epithalamia. Therefore, the subject matter of this Psalm concerns the nuptials of Christ and the Church, which were first initiated when the Son of God united human nature to himself in the virginal womb. Ps. 18: "And he himself as a bridegroom coming forth from his bridal chamber." Hence the subject matter of this Psalm is the same as that of the book called the Song of Songs. The title is as follows: "Unto the end, for those who shall be changed, to the sons of Korah, for understanding, a canticle for the beloved." And it can be understood in two ways. In one way, so that "Psalm" is supplied, so that the sense is: This Psalm leads us to the end, Christ, "for those who shall be changed," namely from the state of unbelief to Christ; hence he says, "instead of your fathers," etc. And so this Psalm pertains to the Passion of Christ, that is, to those who believe in Christ who suffered. And this for understanding the mysteries of Christ and the Church. And not only a Psalm but also a canticle, "for the beloved," namely Christ. Mt. 3: "This is my beloved Son." Jerome has it thus: "A victory song for the lilies, of the sons of Korah, a canticle for the most beloved." And what he says "for the lilies" shows that this Psalm treats of the delights of the bridegroom and bride. And this is signified by flowers, roses, and lilies. Song 2: "Support me with flowers," etc. And it is fitting for virgins, who are like lilies. This Psalm is divided into three parts. First, the prologue of the canticle is set forth. Second, the commendation of the bridegroom is set forth, at "beautiful." Third, the commendation of the bride is set forth, at "hear, O daughter." Regarding the first, he does three things. First, he sets forth the composition of the Psalm. Second, its end, at "I speak." Third, he designates the author, at "my tongue." The composition is designated when it says, "My heart has uttered a good word." Uttering proceeds from excessive fullness or repletion, in which is signified that he speaks from an abundance of devotion and wisdom. Mt. 12: "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks." And it should be noted that the composition of this Psalm is attributed to the heart, from whose great devotion it was composed, because this is not one of those about which Is. 29 says: "This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me"; rather, he pronounces the praises of Christ from the heart. 1 Cor. 14: "I will sing with the spirit, I will sing also with the mind." This heart "has uttered a word," namely of this Psalm, which is "good," because it is consoling, for it speaks of the mysteries of Christ and the Church. 1 Tim. 1: "This is a faithful saying," and no word is better than it. Zech. 1: "The Lord answered the Angel who spoke in me with good words, consoling words." "I speak," that is, I proclaim, "my works to the king," that is, to the honor of Christ the King. Is. 32: "Behold, the king shall reign in justice"; as if to say: I sing this Psalm to the honor of Christ, to whom we ought to dedicate all our works. Col. 3: "Whatever you do in word or in deed, do all in the name of Jesus Christ." "My tongue is the pen of a scribe." Here the author of the Psalm is set forth, who is the tongue; as if to say: let it not be understood that I composed this from my own resources, but with the help of the Holy Spirit, who uses my tongue as a writer uses a pen. And therefore the principal author of this Psalm is the Holy Spirit. 2 Sam. 23: "The Spirit of the Lord spoke through me," as through an instrument. 2 Pet. 1: "Wisdom was not brought by human will, but by the Holy Spirit," etc. And whose pen is it? "Of a scribe writing swiftly," of the Holy Spirit who writes swiftly in the hearts of men. For those who seek wisdom through study acquire it by parts and also over a long time; but those who have it from the Holy Spirit receive it swiftly. Acts 2: "Suddenly there came a sound from heaven," etc. Those who have knowledge through divine revelation are suddenly filled with wisdom, just as those men were suddenly filled with the Holy Spirit. Ps. 147: "His word runs swiftly." Sir. 11: "It is easy in the eyes of God to suddenly make a poor man honorable." Or, "of one working swiftly," because he spoke and they were made, Ps. 148. Now the word "tongue" can be referred to something else, because he not only wished to speak, but first thought in his heart, second spoke with his mouth, and third wrote it down; as if to say: it was not only useful to those present who heard, but also to those in the future. Is. 8: "Take a great book and write in it with the pen of a man." Hab. 2: "Write the vision and explain it." This interpretation, therefore, is the literal one. But some say that these words are set forth in commendation of Christ according to his divinity, as if they were the words of God the Father. But Augustine and Jerome do not approve this interpretation; nevertheless, Dionysius uses it in chapter 2 of On the Divine Names, where he introduces this word, "has uttered," etc. And according to this interpretation, he is commended by the Father in three ways. First, his emanation is described. Second, his power, at "I speak." Third, his operation, at "my tongue." Regarding his emanation from the Father, he sets forth four things. First, his natural procession, when he says "has uttered," which is a certain emanation from fullness; hence the procession of the Son from the Father is a divine uttering, because he proceeds from the fullness of the divine nature. Jn. 3: "The Father loves the Son," etc. Second, he sets forth the mode of emanation, because he did not emanate corporally, nor from some other nature, but in the manner of a spiritual thing. "My heart," as if not from nothing, nor from another essence, but from my heart. Ps. 109: "From the womb, before the daystar, I begot you." Third, the property of the one proceeding is set forth: because "a word." Jn. 1: "In the beginning was the Word." Also, the perfection of the one proceeding is set forth: because "good," as having the full goodness of the divinity. Lk. 18: "No one is good except," etc. His power is shown when he says, "I speak," that is, through the Word I make "all my works to the king," that is, to the honor of the king, namely the Son, who is one God with me. Jn. 1: "All things were made through him." His proper operation is designated when he says, "My tongue is the pen of a scribe"; as if to say, he who is my tongue is also the pen of a scribe. In Sacred Scripture, operations are metaphorically designated by the instruments or members that are the principles of operations; and so by tongue and pen is designated an operation of God befitting the tongue and pen. The operation of the tongue is that through it the wisdom of the heart is diffused to others; through the pen it is designated that the wisdom which is in the heart is transferred to sensible matter, namely parchment. But God both speaks and writes: he speaks when he transfuses his wisdom into rational minds. Ps. 84: "I will hear what the Lord God speaks within me." And this is called the Word, because through it comes all illumination. Jn. 1: "And the life was the light of men." He writes, because he imprints the judgments of his wisdom in rational creatures. Rom. 1: "The invisible things of God," etc. Sir. 1: "God poured it out upon all his works." For just as one looking at a book knows the wisdom of the writer, so when we see creatures, we know the wisdom of God. Therefore, the pen is the Word of God.

[87233] "Beautiful in form above the sons of men." With the prologue set forth according to one sense, or the divinity of Christ according to another sense, here is set forth the commendation of Christ according to his humanity. And because he said, "I speak my works to the king," he commends Christ after the likeness of a king, namely David, from four things: namely, from graciousness, from warlike virtue, from judicial power, and from abundance of delights. The second part, at "Gird yourself." The third, at "your throne." The fourth, at "myrrh." Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he describes the graciousness of the king. Second, the cause or effect, at "therefore." Note that two senses are especially prominent in man, namely sight and hearing; hence through these two someone appears gracious: through beauty to sight, through gracious speech to hearing. Hence these two were especially in Christ; hence Song 2: "Show me your face, let your voice sound in my ears; for your voice is sweet and your face is comely." For he was beautiful and eloquent in those things that befitted his eloquence. As to the first, he says, "beautiful in form." And note in Christ a fourfold beauty. One according to the divine form. Phil. 2: "Who, being in the form of God." And according to this he was beautiful above the sons of men, for all have grace only by redundance and participation, but he has it of himself and fully. Col. 2: "In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily." Heb. 1: "Being the brightness of his glory and the figure of his substance." Wis. 7: "He is the brightness of eternal light and the spotless mirror of God's majesty." Another is the beauty of justice and truth. Jer. 31: "The Lord bless you, O beauty of justice." Jn. 1: "Full of grace and truth." Another is the beauty of an honorable life; and of this, 1 Pet. 5: "Being made a pattern of the flock." And in this form he was beautiful above the sons of men, because his life was more honorable and virtuous than anyone's. 1 Pet. 2: "He committed no sin, nor was deceit found in his mouth." Augustine in the original: "To us beholding, he is everywhere beautiful: beautiful in the hands of his parents, beautiful in miracles, beautiful in scourges, beautiful laying down his life, beautiful on the gallows, beautiful on the wood, beautiful in heaven." The fourth is bodily beauty; and this also was in Christ. Song 1: "Behold, you are beautiful, my beloved." But was he beautiful above the sons of men according to this beauty? It seems not, because Is. 53 says: "We saw him, and there was no beauty in him nor comeliness." Also, by reason it is proved that Christ chose to have poverty and not to use riches, to teach that they are to be despised. But just as these things are to be despised, so also bodily beauty. Prov. 31: "Grace is deceitful and beauty is vain." I respond: It must be said that beauty, health, and things of this sort are said in a certain way by comparison to something, because a certain balance of humors makes for health in a child that does not make for health in an old man. There is a certain health for a lion that is death for a man. Hence health is a proportion of humors in comparison to such a nature. And similarly, beauty consists in the proportion of members and colors. And therefore the beauty of one person is different from that of another; and thus Christ had this beauty to the highest degree insofar as it was fitting for the state and reverence of his condition. It is not therefore to be understood that Christ had blond hair or was ruddy, because this would not have been fitting for him; but he had that bodily beauty to the highest degree which pertained to the state and reverence and graciousness of aspect, so that something divine radiated in his countenance, which made all revere him, as Augustine says. To the first objection, it must be said that the prophet wished to express the contempt of Christ in the Passion, in which the beauty of his body was deformed by the multitude of afflictions. To the other objection, it must be said that those riches and beauties are to be despised which we use badly. He was also gracious in speech; hence he says, "Grace is poured forth on your lips." Sir. 6: "A gracious tongue in a good man shall abound." And his word was gracious. In three ways is someone's word considered gracious because of the things he says: namely, when he says things that are pleasing and useful; thus Christ's word was gracious, because he imposed light burdens and promised rest. Mt. 11: "Come to me, all you who labor and are burdened, and I will refresh you." Jn. 6: "Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of eternal life." Also, someone has a gracious word on account of an ordered and fervent manner of speaking; and thus Christ had an ordered and fervent manner of speaking. Ps. 118: "Your word is enkindled." Also, someone is said to have a gracious word on account of its efficacy in persuading; and thus also Christ had this. Mt. 7: "He was teaching in the temple as one having authority." And therefore Lk. 21 says that all the people "went early in the morning to him" in the temple to hear him. And Jn. 7: "Never has anyone spoken like this man." "Therefore God has blessed you forever." Here the cause or effect is set forth. As was said, to bless God signifies the effect of his goodness, or his conferral of a benefit. God therefore conferred a twofold benefit on Christ the man. Of glory or of the kingdom; and this is the reward of Christ's merits. Phil. 2: "Therefore God has also exalted him." And thus the word "therefore" denotes the meritorious cause; as if to say: because you are beautiful in form, gracious in teaching, "therefore God has blessed you forever," with the blessing of a spiritual kingdom. Gen. 22: "In your seed all nations shall be blessed." The other is the benefit of grace; and thus the sense is: "Therefore God has blessed you forever," so that you might be beautiful and grace might be poured forth on your lips.

[87234] "Gird your sword upon your thigh." Here he is described as powerful in valor. And first, his warlike virtue is set forth. Second, his progress in battle, at "attend." Third, the effect, at "and your right hand shall lead you." Warlike virtue consists in natural strength and the preparation of arms. First, therefore, he sets forth the strong preparation of arms, when he says, "gird your sword." According to another text, it says, "upon your thigh, O most mighty." Here the strength of arms is designated. Song 3: "Each one's sword upon his thigh." But according to the Gloss, to be girded is one thing, because those who are girded are prepared for battle, namely soldiers. 1 Macc. 3: "Gird yourselves and be mighty sons, and be ready in the morning, because it is better for us to die in battle," etc. To be pre-girded is another thing, because those who are pre-girded are prepared for serving. Lk. 12: "He will gird himself and make them recline," etc. To be girded up is another thing, because those who are girded up are prepared for walking. Sir. 36: "A thief girded up, leaping from a city." To be ungirded is another thing, because those who are ungirded are going to rest. 1 Kgs. 20: "Let not him who girds himself boast as he who ungirds himself." The sword of Christ is his teaching. Of this sword, Eph. 6: "The sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God." With this sword Christ placed a division in this world, so that good things might be distinguished from evil. Mt. 10: "I have not come to bring peace, but a sword." This sword is sharp on both sides, as Rev. 1 attests, because he taught about both eternal and temporal things. And it is "upon his thigh," because he used the instrument of his humanity for the word of teaching. Is. 52: "I myself who was speaking, behold I am here." "O most mighty": here his strength or natural power is shown. 1 Sam. 2: "There is none as strong as our God." Job 9: "If strength is sought, he is most mighty." "In your splendor." According to Jerome and the Hebrews, this word "splendor" is joined with "most mighty," and the whole is under one verse, and thus in one way it is read in the Gloss; and if it is thus joined with "most mighty," the sense is: you, Christ, are most mighty "in your splendor," namely of your humanity, according to which he is also greatest in power. Song 5: "His appearance is like Lebanon." "And your beauty," namely of the divinity. Wis. 13: "If, delighted by their beauty, they took them to be gods, let them know how much more beautiful is the Lord of these." Or, you are most mighty "in your splendor," that is, in your splendid beauty. Hence Jerome has, "in your praise," because from this you are praiseworthy and glorious, because you are armed and strong.

[87235] "Attend, proceed prosperously." The Psalmist above set forth, in commendation of Christ, the strength and preparation of the king; here he treats of his progress; and regarding this he does two things. First, he sets forth the progress of the king. Second, its cause, at "because of truth." Regarding the first, it should be known that in place of these three things set forth here, namely "attend, proceed prosperously, and reign," in Jerome's Psalm there is only one: "ascend prosperously." In the ascent, the progress is designated. Jer. 49: "The lion ascends, and the pride of Jordan toward robust beauty." Hence it is clear that these things pertain to a certain perfection and ascent. In the ascent of a warrior there are three things: beginning, middle, and end. The beginning should be diligent and discreet consideration. Prov. 24: "War is begun with forethought." And Lk. 14 says that a king going to war first considers, etc. Hence, "attend," that is, consider diligently. In Christ, "to attend" designates the disposition of his mercy by which he attended to the salvation of the human race. Ps. 37: "Attend to help me." The middle is prosperous progress. The progress of Christ is understood in two ways. In one way, inasmuch as he came forth from the womb of the Virgin in the Nativity. Ps. 18: "As a bridegroom coming forth from his bridal chamber." And this was a prosperous progress, because he was born without sin, and he did not take away his mother's virginity nor inflict pain. In another way, inasmuch as he proceeded from person to person to convert, this one and that one. And in this he was prosperous, because he eventually arrived at the conversion of the whole world. Is. 55: "He shall do whatever I willed, and shall prosper in those things for which I sent him." Ps. 117: "O Lord, grant prosperity." What he says, "attend," can be joined with what he says, "in your splendor"; as if to say: therefore, O beautiful one, in the power of your humanity, etc., and in the beauty of your divinity, attend. His end is his kingdom. Ps. 46: "God shall reign over all nations." His end is that he may reign through faith in the hearts of all. Lk. 1: "And he shall reign in the house of Jacob." And therefore he says, "and reign." The cause of the progress is "because of truth." And this is either a dispositive or a final cause. If "because of" is first taken as a dispositive cause, as Jerome has, "because of the word of truth and meekness of justice," it should be noted that two things are necessary for a king to act prosperously. First, that he be believed; because if nothing were believed of him and he believed others, he could not do more than one man. Prov. 17: "Eloquent words do not befit a fool." Second, that he be loved; because if he is not loved, he cannot prosper in the kingdom or in his affairs; and this is brought about by the meekness and clemency of the king. Sir. 3: "Son, perform your works in meekness." And so these two things dispose toward the prosperity of the king. Prov. 20: "Mercy and truth preserve the king." Ps. 36: "The meek shall inherit the earth." But according to our text, for a king to prosper in his affairs, he must have three things: namely, truth, meekness, and justice. And these three things made Christ prosper: because he was truthful in teaching, meek in suffering, and just in acting. Of the first, Mt. 22: "We know that you are truthful," etc. Of the second, 1 Pet. 2: "When he suffered, he did not threaten." Jer. 11: "I was like a gentle lamb," etc. Of the third, because in nothing did he depart from justice. Ps. 144: "The Lord is faithful in all his words." But if "because of" designates the final cause, the sense is: attend, proceed prosperously, and reign, that is, so as to establish truth. Now Christ established truth in two ways: namely, by fulfilling the promises, and by fulfilling the figures. Rom. 15: "For I say that Christ Jesus was minister of the circumcision to confirm the promises of the fathers." 2 Cor. 1: "However many are the promises of God, in him they are fulfilled." And also "because of meekness" to be derived to the disciples. Mt. 11: "Learn from me," etc. Likewise, "reign because of justice." Jn. 5: "The Father has given all judgment to the Son." "Your right hand shall lead you wonderfully." Here the manner of the determined progress is set forth. Proceed prosperously. And how? "Your right hand shall lead you." And he speaks in the likeness of a warrior who, if he has an enemy against him, is told that his hand must make a way for him, and so he will pass through fighting; as if to say: proceed, if your right hand makes a way for you. And this "wonderfully," because all will marvel. Jerome has: "Your right hand shall teach you," that is, while you do magnificent things, your hand shall show you to be wonderful. Nevertheless, in another Psalm it reads, "Your hand shall lead you." But it must be said that this text does not contradict that one, because Christ is God and man. And therefore, inasmuch as he is God, his right hand and the Father's are the same. And his right hand led Christ wonderfully in the assault upon enemies. Ex. 15: "Your right hand, O Lord, is magnificent in strength; your right hand, O Lord, has struck the enemy." And in the working of miracles by the power of his divinity. Hence he prepared a way for himself in the hearts of men. Ps. 117: "The right hand of the Lord has shown strength." And if we consider the way, it is wonderful. Esther 13: "For you are exceedingly wonderful, O Lord." Also, it was called wonderful. Ps. 138: "Your works are wonderful." "Your arrows are sharp"; as if to say: therefore your right hand shall prepare a way for you, because your arrows are sharp. And here the power of arms and their effect are set forth. The arms of Christ are arrows, which are the words of Christ, which are called arrows for three reasons. First, because an arrow penetrates to the heart with its sharpness. Hos. 2: "I will lead her into the wilderness and speak to her heart"; so the words of Christ: Heb. 4: "The word of God is living and effective, and more piercing than any two-edged sword." Also, an arrow moves swiftly. Wis. 5: "The passing of life," etc. So the word of Christ suddenly filled the whole world, because the preaching of Christ was spread through almost the entire world before the destruction of Jerusalem. Ps. 147: "His word runs swiftly." Also, an arrow reaches to distant things; so also the word of Christ. Ps. 18: "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth." And so the word of God is a sword, insofar as it wounded the Jews who were converted to Christ, who was near; for which reason it is said, "gird your sword." And it is also an arrow, insofar as it reached the remote Gentiles, and they were converted to Christ. Eph. 2: "He preached peace to you who were far off, and peace to those who were near." "Peoples shall fall under you." Here the effect of the divine word is set forth, which is the conversion of the people to God; hence, "peoples," etc., that is, all shall run to you. Phil. 2: "At the name of Jesus every knee shall bow," etc. But what does it mean when he adds, "in the hearts of the enemies of the king"? This can be understood in two ways. In one way, so that it is joined with the first clause of this verse, "peoples shall fall under you," as an interpolation; and the sense is: "Your arrows are sharp and enter into the hearts of the enemies of the king." Your words are like arrows that penetrate hearts, etc. And from this, "peoples shall fall under you." In another way, so that it is joined with "peoples shall fall under you"; and this "in the hearts," or "in the heart, of the enemies of the king," that is, of you who are king. For some things are subjected by force, as enemies are now subjected. And of this subjection he says he does not speak, but of voluntary subjection; and therefore he says, "in the hearts"; as if to say: let them be subjected according to those hearts by which they were hostile to Christ. Ps. 53: "Voluntarily I will sacrifice to you." Or otherwise: "Your arrows are sharp, peoples shall fall under you in the hearts of the enemies of the king": peoples, I say, who were enemies of the king, that is, of Christ; as if to say: those who were against the king, namely Christ, shall be subjected to him. And literally this has come to pass, because the Gentiles who tried to destroy the faith of Christ now serve Christ. Is. 55: "Behold, you shall call nations that you did not know." Ps. 17: "A people whom I did not know has served me."

[87236] "Your throne, O God, is forever and ever." Above, the Psalmist commended Christ for his graciousness and warlike virtue; here he commends him for his judicial power. And first, he describes his judicial power. Second, the execution of that power, at "a rod of direction." Third, the reason, at "therefore he has anointed you." He says therefore, "Your throne, O God." By "throne" in Scripture, judicial power is designated. Ps. 121: "There the thrones of judgment sat." Now judicial power belongs or pertains to Christ. Jn. 5: "The Father has given all judgment to the Son"; and therefore by the throne of Christ, his power is understood. Mt. 19: "In the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit," etc. But prelates and kings also have this judicial power; but as ministers. Wis. 6: "When you were ministers of his kingdom, you did not judge rightly." But Christ as the principal judge, and as true God; and therefore he says, "Your throne, O God," for vengeance belongs to the Lord; and here he expressly speaks of Christ, because he directs his speech to him. Of this, Rev. 3: "He who overcomes, I will give him to sit on my throne, even as I also overcame and sat on the throne." Is. 6: "I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne." Also, there is one temporal judicial power and another perpetual; and such is the power of the Son of God; hence he says, "forever and ever," because his judgment concerns eternal things. Dan. 7: "His power is an everlasting power." Thus he describes the power, dignity, and eternity of God. Consequently, he treats of the execution of power when he says, "a rod of direction." And first, the execution of power is set forth. Second, its explanation. For it is necessary that a king restrain offenses, because, as the Philosopher says, if the minds of men were ordered by God so that they would obey fatherly counsel, kings and judges would not be necessary; hence, so that the unruly may be corrected, kings are necessary, and hence they have a scepter. Prov. 22: "Folly is bound up in the heart of a child, and the rod of discipline shall drive it away." But he has a rod to coerce enemies. Ps. 2: "You shall rule them with a rod of iron, and like a vessel," etc. Also to govern subjects. Mic. 7: "Feed your people with your rod." And therefore it is said, "the rod of your kingdom is a rod of direction," that is, for leading the people in the right way, because this is the end of the law and of governance: that they may not go astray, but may become virtuous. And this is the end of politics, and this belongs to Christ. Ps. 24: "Direct me in your truth and teach me." But this direction consists in man's abandoning evil and clinging to good. Is. 30: "This is the way; walk in it, and do not turn aside either to the right or to the left," that is, neither by excess nor by defect; and therefore he says, "You have loved justice." Also, he must hate iniquity, because if he does not love justice, he does not lead to the good; and Christ did this above all, because "the Lord is just, and he has loved justice." Also, if they do not hate iniquity, they do not punish; and because Christ especially hates iniquity, therefore he punishes the wicked. "Therefore he has anointed you." Here the cause is set forth, either final or effective; as if to say: therefore you have wrought justice, that God might anoint you. But did Christ merit this anointing? No, but he merited the manifestation of this anointing. And in Scripture, something is said to be done when it becomes known. And Christ, through his Passion, merited exaltation in the faith of all peoples. And thus the word "therefore" designates the final cause. But if it is the effective cause, it is understood thus; as if to say: so that your throne might be, and the rod, etc., "therefore he has anointed you." In the Old Testament, priests and kings were anointed, as is clear of David in 1 Sam. 16, and of Solomon, as is clear in 1 Kgs. 1. And prophets were anointed, as is clear of Elisha, who was anointed by Elijah, 1 Kgs. 19; and these things belong to Christ, who was king. Lk. 1: "He shall reign in the house of Jacob forever." He was also a priest, who offered himself as a sacrifice to God, Eph. 5. He was also a prophet, who foretold the way of salvation. Deut. 18: "The Lord will raise up a prophet from the children of Israel." But how was he anointed? Not with visible oil, because his kingdom is not of this world, Jn. 18; nor did he exercise a material priesthood; and therefore he was not anointed with material oil, but with the oil of the Holy Spirit; and therefore he says, "with the oil of gladness." And the Holy Spirit is called oil because, just as oil rises above all other liquids, so the Holy Spirit above all creatures. Gen. 1: "The Spirit of the Lord moved over the waters," that is, it must be above all things in the hearts of men, because it is the love of God. Second, because of its sweetness. All mercy and sweetness of mind is from the Holy Spirit. 2 Cor. 6: "In sweetness, in gentleness, in the Holy Spirit." Third, because oil is diffusive, so the Holy Spirit is communicative. 2 Cor. 13: "The communion of the Holy Spirit be always with all of you, amen." Rom. 5: "The charity of God is poured forth in our hearts through the Holy Spirit." Also, oil is the nourishment of fire and heat, and the Holy Spirit fosters and nourishes the warmth of love in us. Song 8: "Its lamps are lamps of fire." Also, oil illuminates, and so does the Holy Spirit. Job 32: "The inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding." But he says, "O God, God." This word "God" is either in the nominative or vocative case; and therefore in Latin it is ambiguous. But in Greek it is not, because there the nominative and vocative are different; for it says, "O God, your God has anointed you with the oil of gladness." And it is given to understand that it speaks of Christ, who is God, and cannot be anointed insofar as he is God, because insofar as he is God, he cannot be advanced. And therefore something must be taken in Christ in which he is anointed, and this is the human nature. And according to this, he has God, because insofar as he is God, he does not have God. And it is called the "oil of gladness" because in the time of gladness the Orientals anointed themselves with oil. Is. 61: "The oil of joy for mourning." The Holy Spirit is the cause of joy. Rom. 14: "And joy in the Holy Spirit." Gal. 5: "Charity, joy, peace." Because the Holy Spirit cannot be in anyone without his rejoicing in the good and in the hope of future good. Hence he says, "above your companions," because Christ was anointed above all other saints. Jn. 1: "We saw him full of grace and truth." His companions are said to be anointed because whatever is had of this oil, that is, of the grace of the Holy Spirit, is from the abundance of Christ. Jn. 1: "Of his fullness we have all received." Ps. 132: "Like ointment on the head," etc.

[87237] "Myrrh and gutta." Here he treats of the delights of the king, and he describes these delights from four things: from clothing, from dwelling, from attendance, and from marriage. Of the first, he says, "Myrrh and gutta and cassia from your garments." The garments of Christ can be twofold: namely, his body. Is. 63: "Why is your garment red?" Also, the garment of Christ is all the saints. Is. 49: "You shall be clothed with all these as with an ornament." And from these proceeds the fragrance of myrrh, gutta, and cassia, whether from the garment that is his body or from the saints. Myrrh has bitterness; and so if it refers to the body of Christ, it signifies the bitterness of the Passion. Song 5: "His fingers," namely, nailed to the wood, "dripping with choice myrrh." But if it refers to the saints, it signifies penance. Sir. 24: "Like choice myrrh I gave forth a sweet odor." Where we have "gutta," the Greek has "aloes"; the Hebrews, "stacte." Gutta is a liquid of a certain herb, and something hot, and it is good against swellings; and it signifies humility, which was especially in Christ. Mt. 11: "Learn from me, for I am meek," etc. It was also in the saints. Is. 66: "Upon whom shall I look, except upon the lowly and contrite in spirit, and him who trembles at my words?" Aloe is the juice of a plant, but it is not taken here in that sense; rather, it refers to a certain wood called aloe, which is aromatic. Stacte is a gum of myrrh, which is more precious than myrrh. And this is the same as myrrh in terms of fragrance. Cassia is of three kinds. One cassia is like a tube; another is the fruit of a tree -- and he does not intend this here, because it is not aromatic; but there is a certain cassia bark which is aromatic, and it is to this that the text refers here. Or, according to the Gloss, there is a certain tree called casia that grows in watery places; and through this is signified the water of tears, or the water of baptism; as if to say: the fragrance of all these things proceeds from the saints and from your body. 2 Cor. 2: "We are the good odor of Christ." Of the second, he says, "from ivory houses"; as if to say: there is also fragrance from your ivory houses, which are fragrant because of these aromatics. The ancients had paneled walls; with us they are of marble. And so among the Hebrews and Orientals, the walls were covered with ivory. Amos 3: "The ivory houses shall perish." "Houses" signify the faithful. 1 Pet. 2: "You yourselves, as living stones, are built up into spiritual houses," etc. "Ivory," cold on account of chastity. Song 5: "His belly is of ivory." Also, white on account of purity; ruddy on account of charity. Lam. 4: "More ruddy than ancient ivory." Of the third, "from which the daughters of kings have delighted you in your honor"; as if to say: he is so delightful that he has the daughters of kings in his service; as if to say: your garments have prepared the daughters of kings who serve you. Literally, the daughters of earthly kings delight us for the honor of Christ, because they dedicated themselves to Christ and died for Christ, and this "in your honor," that is, for your honor; as if to say: not only the daughters of one king, but also the daughters of kings serve Christ. Or otherwise: kings are the apostles; their daughters are faithful souls. Or kings are doctors. Rev. 5: "You have made us a kingdom and priests to our God." Their daughters are the Christian and faithful people. 1 Cor. 4: "In Christ Jesus through the Gospel I have begotten you." These are daughters in the honor of Christ, not in the honor of kings, namely Peter and Paul, but of Christ. 1 Cor. 1: "We preach Christ crucified." They delighted with these aromatics.

[87238] "The queen stood." Above, the Psalmist praised Christ for graciousness, warlike virtue, and delights; here he praises him for his bride, whom he describes in four respects: as to the presence of the bridegroom, as to her dignity, as to her glory, and as to her adornment. The bride of Christ is the Church; the brides of a king are called queens. Esther 2: "This is Esther, appointed queen." And this queen is the Church. 2 Cor. 11: "I have espoused you to one husband, as a chaste virgin," etc. Her dignity is that she is a queen. She "stood," always clinging to God and united to him. Hence the Angels who are not sent are called assistants. Dan. 7: "Thousands of thousands," etc. Ps. 5: "In the morning I will stand before you," etc. Gregory says: one sees by faith, is raised by hope, is united by charity. The glory of this queen is the prerogative she has, because "at the right hand," that is, among the better goods. Hence the Son also, insofar as he is among the better goods of the Father, according to his humanity, is said to be at the right hand. Mk. 16: "The Lord Jesus indeed sits at the right hand of God." And these better goods are such; but if spiritual goods are compared with temporal ones, spiritual goods are superior. And this queen stood in spiritual goods. Prov. 3: "Length of days in her right hand." Also, if by "right hand" are signified good works, these are superior to sins. Prov. 4: "The ways that are on the right hand, the Lord knows." And in these this queen stood. Her adornment is described when he says, "in gilded clothing." Jerome does not have "surrounded by variety," nor do the Hebrews; but Jerome has, "in a golden diadem." In the Hebrew, "in a mass of gold." And according to our text, there is a twofold garment of the Church. One is the teaching of the two testaments. Prov. 31: "All her household are clothed with double garments." And this garment is not gold alone, but gilded, because it is resplendent with divine wisdom, with which this teaching is full. Nevertheless, it is "surrounded by variety." And this can refer to the diverse kinds of languages, or to a more profound mode of wisdom. The other garment is virtuous action. Ps. 131: "Her priests," etc. By gold, charity is signified. Gen. 2: "The gold of that land is very good." For charity is brilliant and red. And therefore it is said to be gilded, because it is informed by charity. 1 Cor. 16: "Let all your works be done in charity." Or, "surrounded by variety," that is, by diverse works of virtue; because some were golden through martyrdom, some rosy through the groan of penance. Col. 3: "Put on, as the elect of God, holy and beloved, the bowels of mercy," etc. And all this can be explained of the Blessed Virgin, who is queen and mother of the king, who stands above all choirs in gilded clothing, that is, gilded with divinity -- not that she is God, but because she is the mother of God.

[87239] "Hear, O daughter." Here the bride is commended in four ways: for her beauty; for the excellence of her glory, at "all her glory." For her company, at "they shall be brought." And for her offspring, at "instead of your fathers." Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth how she acquires beauty or graciousness. Second, he treats of the graciousness itself, at "and the king shall desire." First, therefore, she is made attentive to the admonition; hence he says, "Hear, O daughter." He calls the future Church "daughter" for a double reason. One is as David speaking in his own person, because just as insofar as we cling to Christ the son of Abraham, we are children of Abraham, so also children of David, whose son Christ is. Or he speaks in the person of the apostles, from whom we have been propagated in Christ Jesus through the Gospel. He says therefore, "Hear, O daughter." Jas. 1: "Let every person be swift to hear," namely the Gospel or the word of Christ. Lk. 11: "Blessed are those who hear the word of God." Or the Scripture of the prophets, that they may believe in Christ. Is. 53: "Who has believed our report?" "And see" -- through faith here, but in the future you will see through the direct vision. 1 Cor. 13: "We see now," etc. Or, see Christ born. Bar. 3: "After this he was seen on earth." Jn. 1: "We saw him full of grace and truth." "Incline your ear," namely through humility, so that you may obey. Sir. 6: "If you incline your ear, you shall receive instruction." "Forget your people." An imaginary admonition, that this queen came to David or Solomon from a foreign people. And therefore she is admonished to be mindful of her own. And this befits the Church, which was called to Christ from a foreign people, whether of the Jews or of the Gentiles; because, according to Augustine, no one can come to the new life of Christ unless he repents of his old life, namely of sin. And therefore he says, "Forget your people." 1 Chron. 16: "They passed from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people." "And the house of your father," namely the Devil. Jn. 8: "You are of your father the Devil." Ezek. 16: "Your father was an Amorite." Or of sin, or of carnal affection. Gen. 41: "God has made me forget all my labors and the house of my father." And this is signified in Deut. 21, concerning the girl from among the captives, who must be shaved and must weep for her father and mother as if dead. "And the king shall desire your beauty." Here he promises the bride the graciousness of the king. First, from the king, and this is love. Second, from the people, and this is honor, at "they shall entreat your countenance." He therefore promises the love of the king and shows the dignity of the king. He says therefore: if you forget your people and the house of your father, from this you will acquire spiritual beauty. Ps. 25: "Lord, I have loved the beauty of your house." And this beauty is desired by the spiritual bridegroom; therefore he says, "And the king shall desire your beauty." And this beauty is the beauty of justice. Jer. 31: "The Lord bless you, O beauty of justice." "He shall desire," that is, he shall delight in it. Is. 62: "Because the Lord has been pleased in you." And this is to be desired, because this king is great in power, in nature, and in honor. The first he has because he is king; therefore he is Lord. Ps. 99: "Know that he himself is the Lord." The second, because he himself is God. Ps. 94: "Because the Lord is a great God." The third, because "they shall adore him," namely those who are far off, and all peoples of the whole world. Ps. 85: "All the nations you have made shall come and adore before you, O Lord." Zeph. 2: "They shall adore him, each one from his own place, all the islands of the nations." Also, those who are near shall adore him, because "the daughters of Tyre with gifts," because Tyre is near the promised land. Hence, "daughters," that is, inhabitants of that land, "shall entreat your countenance," that is, they shall submit to you with gifts. For this was fulfilled when the Canaanite woman, coming from the borders of Tyre, came to Jesus, Mt. 15. Or, "all the rich of the people shall entreat your countenance," that is, men who are in Tyre. Tyre is interpreted as "anguish"; hence all who are in anguish shall beseech you. Literally, all came to Christ. Lk. 4: "When the sun had set, all who had sick people with various diseases," etc. Is. 26: "Lord, in distress they sought you; in the tribulation of murmuring, your teaching was for them." "And they shall offer gifts," that is, themselves. Or alms. Is. 19: "They shall make vows to the Lord and shall perform them."

[87240] "All her glory." Above, the Psalmist commended the bride for her beauty; here he commends her as to glory, both interior and exterior. He does the first when he says, "all her glory." The word "her" is superfluous; hence it is construed as explanatory: "her," namely "of the king's daughter, from within." And this in three ways. First, because in interior conscience, not in the outward reputation of men, as is the fame of sinners. 2 Cor. 1: "Our glory is this, the testimony of our conscience." Second, in interior justice, not in exterior observance, as in the Old Testament. Rom. 2: "Circumcision of the heart, not of the flesh; in spirit, not in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God." Third, that which is in eternal hope, which is interior, not in the hope of temporal things, which is exterior. Mt. 6: "Take heed that you do not do your justice before men. But when you give alms," etc. He does the second when he says, "in golden fringes." By these fringes is understood the teaching of the Church. Ex. 28, where the Lord commands that on the fringes of the priestly garment there should be bells, whose sound would be heard. By the sound, therefore, teaching is designated. Therefore, in the teaching of divine wisdom, which is designated by gold, there is great glory; and yet it is "surrounded by variety," that is, adorned and clothed with other tongues, that is, various modes of teaching, yet they sound the same truth. Acts 2: "The apostles were speaking in various tongues," etc. Or otherwise, "in golden fringes" -- and this refers to interior purity and the adornment of virtues; "surrounded by" -- to the exterior; as if to say: all glory is from within, and these two things are especially in golden fringes. And because of this, "fringes" is understood as the end of life, either as regards the whole Church or the whole person, because fringes are at the extremities of a garment; and he does not say "gilded" but that they are "golden." For the Gloss says that those who are found at the end of the world will be perfect and holy. Also, as long as a person is making progress, he is as it were gilded; but when he is at the end, then he will be completely filled with brightness. Prov. 4: "The path of the just, like a shining light, grows and advances until the perfect day." And he says, "surrounded by variety," exterior variety, namely of different nations, or of different graces and virtues.

[87241] "They shall be brought." Here she is commended for her company; and regarding this he does three things. First, he describes her company; second, how one arrives at her company, at "they shall be presented"; third, when this company reaches its destination, at "they shall be brought." Jerome has it differently: "All the glory of the king's daughter is from her golden robes." And here is the period; as if to say: she has a garment of golden robes. And then: "in variety, with the others," etc., "they shall be brought," etc. In the Hebrew, it is different: "above the enclosure of gold are the garments," that is, surrounded. And then: "moreover, with the fine linens that are of embroidered work; those who are close to her shall be brought," thus clothed. And he enumerates two: virgins and companions. And if they are taken to be the same, the sense is: virgins interiorly, namely, faithful souls not corrupted by sin, "shall be brought to the king," namely to Christ, who is the King of kings. "They shall be brought," I say, because they will not come by themselves. Jn. 6: "No one comes to me," etc.; and therefore Song 1 says: "Draw me after you." "But they shall be brought after her," namely after the universal Church, because no one will come or be brought to Christ unless he follows the teaching of the Church. Or "after her," that is, after the Blessed Virgin, because virgins of Christ shall be brought to him for the preservation of chastity and for the exercise of other virtues. And these are "her companions," namely either of the Church or of the Blessed Virgin, and these "shall be presented." Of the former he says "they shall be brought," because they will be converted more easily to Christ. Of the latter he says "they shall be presented," because they are drawn more importunately. 2 Tim. 4: "Be insistent in season and out of season." But if they are taken as different, then by "virgins" are understood the perfect; and these are brought as if wanting to go by themselves. Ps. 104: "He led his people out in exultation and his elect in joy"; because "they shall be presented in joy," interior, "and exultation," exterior. For they offered themselves to Christ voluntarily. Ps. 53: "Voluntarily I will sacrifice to you." Or "they shall be presented" by the Angels into heaven. Lk. 16: "It came to pass that he died," etc. And where shall they be presented? "In the temple of the king." Here it is clear that he speaks of Christ the King who is God, because he says "temple"; as if to say: so that they themselves may be the temple of the king. 1 Cor. 3: "The temple of God is holy, which you are." Or so that they may contemplate in the temple of God, that is, so that they may be free for God; for to this end is the fellowship of virgins ordained, that they may be free for God. 1 Cor. 7: "The married woman thinks about how to please her husband; but the unmarried woman thinks about how to please God."

[87242] "Instead of your fathers, sons have been born to you." Here he commends her for her offspring. Regarding which he sets forth four things: namely, the origin of the offspring, its dignity, its office, and its fruit. He says therefore, "Instead of your fathers, sons have been born to you." The children of the early Church are the apostles and their successors. Sons are said to be born to the Church through the teaching of Christ her bridegroom, and others through the teaching of the apostles, and other sons of other preachers. And therefore it is not inconsistent that the same persons are both sons and fathers, because the apostles themselves are fathers of those whom they converted. 1 Cor. 4: "In Christ Jesus I have begotten you." Others also are both fathers and sons. These sons, therefore, are born to the Church: sons who are the apostles, and other holy men and doctors. Or the good fathers were the prophets. Sir. 44: "Let us praise men of glory, and our ancestors." And in place of these, sons have been born to the Church who fulfill their dignity; and thus the origin and offspring of the bride are clear. The dignity follows: "You shall appoint them princes over all the earth," that is, those who first receive, you shall first receive. These are therefore called princes because they first received the gifts of the Holy Spirit. Rom. 8: "Not only they, but we ourselves also who have the first fruits of the Spirit" -- earlier in time, more abundantly, says the Gloss. Hence, just as no woman is compared to the Blessed Virgin, so no saint can be compared or equaled to the apostles. Also, they are called princes because they were and are the ones governing the churches. Also because they were the first teachers after Christ. Ps. 67: "The princes went before," etc. These are to be loved. Jdt. 5: "Let your heart love the princes of Israel." You shall appoint these as princes, who were not appointed by themselves, but by Christ. Jn. 15: "You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you," etc. Also, other prelates are appointed by the Supreme Pontiff. Heb. 5: "No one takes the honor to himself." And not in some part, but "over all the earth." Ps. 18: "Their sound has gone forth into all the earth," etc. "And they are exceedingly honored," etc. Ps. 138. And this especially belongs to Peter and Paul; for Peter obtained the universal leadership of the Church. Jn. 21: "Feed my sheep." Paul over the whole world, as regards the Gentile nations. Is. 49: "I have set you as a light to the nations, that you may be my salvation to the end of the earth." And he himself says this also in Acts 13. "They shall remember your name, O Lord." Here the office of the apostles is set forth, which is to preach the name of God. Mk. 16: "Going into the whole world, preach the Gospel to every creature"; and therefore he says, "they shall remember," that is, they shall cause others to remember "your name in every generation." As to place, because in every part of the world; "and generation," as to time, because "heaven and earth shall pass away," etc. Mk. 13. Mt. 28: "Behold, I am with you," etc. "Therefore the peoples." Here the fruit is set forth, which is that all peoples shall confess to you, O Christ; and he says "peoples," because not only one people, but all. Ps. 66: "Let the peoples confess to you, O God; let all the peoples confess to you." Phil. 2: "Every tongue shall confess that," etc. These shall confess to you "forever." In Greek, "eternal" is the same as "age" or "aeon"; hence the Gloss: "forever," namely of the present age, "and unto the age of ages," that is, in the future. And this memory shall endure forever. Is. 35: "They shall obtain joy and gladness." Another text has, "I will remember your name," etc. And this is better; and then it refers to the fruit of the apostles, and it will be the voice of the converted people; as if to say: I say that you shall appoint them princes, and I, the Christian people, will remember your name, etc. In this, faith is designated, which is in the heart; and then praise, which follows faith. And this Psalm is sung on the feast of the Lord's Nativity because of the praise of the bridegroom which is touched upon. It is also sung on feasts of the Virgin, because of her praise which is touched upon. Of the first, at "beautiful." Of the second, at "the queen stood." It is also sung on the feasts of virgins, because "they shall be brought." Also on the feasts of the apostles, "instead of your fathers."