Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 25
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 25

[87008] Above, the Psalmist set forth a prayer against tribulations; here, however, so that his prayer may be more acceptable, he puts forward his own justice. The title is straightforward, because it is not new. Concerning this, therefore, the Psalmist does two things. First he sets forth his whole intention in general. Second he explains it in particular, at "I have not sat with the council." Concerning the first he does three things. First he asks for judgment. Second he alleges his justice, at "Because I." Third he excuses any presumption, at "Because your mercy." David, from his own person or from the person of a just man, seeing himself mixed in with sinners in place -- if not in merit -- asks to be distinguished from them; hence he says, "O Lord, judge," that is, distinguish me from them. But against this: "Enter not into judgment with your servant, because no one living shall be justified in your sight" (Ps. 142). I respond. It must be said that there is a twofold judgment, namely of severity and strictness: and this judgment he does not seek, because no one could bear it; the other is a judgment of mercy and examination: and this he seeks: Jer. 10: "Correct me, O Lord, but in judgment and not in your fury," that is, of severity. And he proposes his innocence; and therefore he says, "Because I have walked in my innocence," that is, I have advanced in my innocence, or "I have entered," because our life is a kind of journey. Prov. 4: "I will lead you through the paths of equity, which when you have entered," etc. And this "in my innocence," which I propose to maintain: Job 22: "The innocent shall be saved, and he shall be saved by the cleanness of his hands." "I shall not be weakened": Jerome has "I shall not fail," namely in maintaining this innocence: Job 27: "Until I fail, I will not depart from it": and this I shall do, not in my own strength but by confidence in divine help, because "trusting in the Lord I shall not be weakened": 1 Mac. 2: "All who hope in him do not grow weak." But against this: this seems to be presumption: Job 9: "If I try to justify myself, my own mouth will condemn me." I respond. It must be said that the allegation of innocence can sometimes proceed from pride, when someone attributes it to himself, and this is evil; sometimes from divine mercy, and this is good; and therefore he adds, "Because your mercy." But how do you know that you are innocent? "Prove me, O Lord," you know this. And he sets forth three things: namely, proof, tribulation, and temptation. The second follows from the first, the third from the second. He says, therefore, "O Lord, prove me," not so that you may learn something about me from this, but so that you may show it to others. A person is best proved through temptation, which is the taking of experience: temptation is the receiving of experience about what one does not know; proof, however, is the manifestation of virtue about what one does know. And therefore he says, "Try me," namely for this purpose, that I may appear tested to myself and to others: for God does not tempt to evil: Jas. 1: "God is not a tempter of evils"; but he is said to tempt when certain things are shown through immense difficulty. This temptation, moreover, is done through fire, as it is said in Wis. 3: "As gold in the furnace he has tried them." And therefore he says, "Burn my loins and my heart," that is, send tribulations, through which it may be clear what is in my heart and loins. To the heart is attributed thought, to the loins pleasure. And this appears through tribulations; because those who delight in earthly things are greatly disturbed when they lose them, but not those who do not delight in them. Or it can be referred to the fire of the Holy Spirit: Lk. 12: "I have come to cast fire upon the earth": as if to say, lest I fail in tribulations, apply your help, send the fire which may burn away whatever is carnal in my pleasures and whatever is vain in my thoughts.

[87009] "Because." Here he excuses himself in two ways for asking to be tried. First from his thought, because he thinks of God's mercy, when he says, "Because your mercy is before my eyes"; as if to say, I ask to be tried because I trust in your mercy, which always provides a way out with the temptation: Is. 63: "I will remember the mercies of the Lord, the praise of the Lord for all the things the Lord has rendered to me." Likewise from the love of justice. "And I have been well pleased in your truth," that is, if you punish me for my sins, it pleases me; if I am tried, I know that you will reward me.

[87010] "I have not." Here he explains his intention in particular. And first he sets forth his innocence. Second he sets forth his petition, at "Do not destroy me with the wicked, O God." He shows, therefore, his innocence. And first by his withdrawal from evil. Second by his approach to good, at "I will wash." Now there is a threefold kind of evil, according to three sins. For sin is either against God, or against neighbor, or against oneself. Against oneself are sins of vanity, by which a man vainly delights in earthly things; and of these he says, "I have not sat with the council of vanity"; as if to say, I do not claim that in some way I was never with them, because it cannot happen that a man never takes vain delight in earthly things; but he says, "I have not sat": Tob. 3: "I never mixed myself with those who play; nor have I made myself a companion of those who walk in levity." Sins against neighbor are sins generated through action; hence he says, "And with those who do iniquitous things I will not enter," that is, not only have I not sat, etc., but I have not even entered, that is, in no way have I mixed myself with them: Prov. 1: "My son, if sinners entice you, do not walk with them." Likewise, the aforesaid sins are thought in the heart; hence he says, "I have hated the assembly of evildoers," that is, the congregation of the malicious: Ps. 118: "I have hated the wicked," that is, their fault and iniquity. Third, he sets forth sin against God, which is impiety; and therefore he says, "And with the wicked," that is, heretics and schismatics, "I will not sit," that is, I will not share in their doctrines: Heb. 13: "Do not be led away by various and strange doctrines."

[87011] "I will wash." Above, the Psalmist showed his innocence by the fact that he separated himself from evil; here, however, he shows it by the fact that he applies himself to good. And because the goods whose application makes us just are divine goods, therefore he speaks of his application to them. Concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth his effort. Second, its effect, at "O Lord, I have loved the beauty of your house." Concerning the first, he does three things. First he proposes his disposition for divine worship. Second he sets forth the divine worship itself, at "I will go round about." Third, the fruit, at "That I may hear the voice of praise." The disposition is formed through purity and innocence: Ps. 14: "Lord, who shall dwell in your tabernacle?" etc. Ps. 23: "The innocent in hands and clean of heart." And therefore, that he may approach in purity, he treats of purity. He says, therefore, "I will wash my hands among the innocent," that is, my works, which are principally washed by God through the grace he infuses: Ps. 50: "Wash me yet more, O Lord, from my iniquity," etc. Likewise they are washed by us through penance: Is. 1: "Wash yourselves, be clean," etc. "I will wash," therefore, that is, I will apply penance so that they may be washed. And this "among the innocent," because from companionship manners are formed: Ps. 17: "With the innocent you shall be innocent," etc. And thus washed, I shall approach divine worship. "And I will go round about your altar, O Lord." Here he speaks of the material altar, and it is said, "I will go round about your altar, O Lord," because he either prays or stands near it; Sir. 50, concerning Simon the high priest: "He himself standing beside the altar." And therefore the priest when he approaches the sacrament says "I will wash," etc. Or it can be understood of the spiritual altar. The altar is in the temple: and just as there is a threefold temple, so there is a threefold altar. The first is the just man: 1 Cor. 6: "Do you not know that your members are the temple of the Holy Spirit?" The altar of this temple is the heart: Lev. 6: "The fire," namely of charity, "shall burn always on the altar," that is, in the heart. This altar we ought to go round about, or stand near, that is, adorn, always returning to Christ: Prov. 4: "With all watchfulness keep your heart, because life proceeds from it." Another temple is the Church: and the altar of this temple is Christ: Heb. 13: "We have an altar from which those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat." Or faith. And this we ought to go round about, so that with our whole heart we may be around him. The third temple is God himself: Rev. 21: "I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty is its temple," etc.; and the altar of this temple is the mercy of God. And this we ought to go round about with the desire of the mind: Ps. 144: "The Lord is sweet to all, and his mercies are above all his works." Consequently he shows the fruit: and there is a twofold fruit, namely to hear and to narrate; hence he says, "That I may hear the voice of praise." And this literally around the material altar, because this sacrifice is most acceptable to God: Ps. 49: "The sacrifice of praise shall honor me." Likewise, the praise which the Holy Spirit speaks in us: Ps. 84: "I will hear what the Lord God speaks in me." Likewise, in heaven: Is. 35: "Joy and gladness," etc. Or "that I may hear the voice of praise," that is, of Christ praising me: and this will be at the judgment when he shall say, "I was hungry," etc. (Mt. 25). But Rev. 22 says: "Let him who hears say: Come." Hence we hear so that we may tell others: Is. 21: "What I have heard from the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, I have announced to you." And therefore he adds, "That I may declare all your wonderful works": Sir. 42: "Did not God make his saints declare," etc. And he says "all your wonderful works," as to affection or endeavor, not as to effect, because he is greater than all praise.

[87012] "O Lord." Here he shows the affection he has for divine worship, which, to be fitting, ought to be an affection of love. For this reason he says, "O Lord, I have loved the beauty of your house." Dionysius says: "The good and the beautiful is lovable to all." Hence every man loves what is beautiful: the carnal love carnal beauty, the spiritual love spiritual beauty, and this is the beauty of the house of God: Num. 24: "How beautiful are your tabernacles, O Jacob, and your tents, O Israel! As woody valleys, as watered gardens near the rivers, as tabernacles which the Lord has fashioned." This beauty, moreover, is the beauty of good works, or of divine gifts, or of the saints themselves; because all of these are, as it were, a certain adornment of the house of God. All of these, therefore, I have loved, so that they might make me fit for the beauty of the house of God. Thus, therefore, the affection is shown, because it is love, and beauty, and adornment. But it should be known that this beauty comes from God's dwelling in it; just as a house is not beautiful unless it is inhabited: hence I have loved me so that you may dwell in me, or I have loved the fatherland so that I may dwell there or may tend toward it. And therefore he says, "And the place where your glory dwells": and all of these -- that is, good works, the gifts of God, and the saints themselves -- are the beauty of the house of God, insofar as divine grace, which beautifies like light, shines in them, as Ambrose says, because without light all things are ugly: Ez. 43: "The glory of the Lord entered through the gate."

[87013] "Do not destroy." Here he explains the petition for judgment that he seeks: and he explains what kind of judgment he sought: and he asks two things. First he asks to be separated from evils that may come in the future. Second, from evils he suffers in the present, at "Redeem me." First, therefore, he sets forth the petition. Where it should be known that punishment is reserved by God for two kinds of men: namely those who are wicked or sinners against God: Ez. 18: "The wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him." And therefore he says, "Do not destroy," etc.: as if to say, if I am afflicted here and suffer earthly evils with the wicked, nevertheless do not destroy my soul with them. Likewise, punishment is reserved for the wicked against their neighbor: therefore he says, "And with men of blood, my life": Ps. 54: "Men of blood and deceit." Here are counted all who offend against their neighbor, in whatever way. There is, moreover, a threefold blood. One which is caused by food and drink: hence food and drink is called the blood of the poor: Sir. 34: "The bread of the needy is the life of the poor man; he who defrauds him is a man of blood." The second is the blood of a man; and this the murderer sheds. The third is the blood of seed for the preservation of the species, and this the fornicator sheds, because he does not act for the sake of offspring. "In whose hands are iniquities"; as if to say, I ask this, namely to be separated from them then, because now I am separated in manner of life and conduct, because "iniquities are in their hands," namely, they are very prone to evil: Prov. 1: "Their feet run to evil and hasten to shed blood": Is. 59: "Works of iniquity are in their hands." Likewise there is the inclination of their affections to worldly things; hence he says, "Their right hand is filled with bribes": Job 15: "Fire shall devour the tents of those who gladly accept bribes." Or "their right hand is filled with bribes"; as if to say, although they are wicked, yet you give them temporal things, and in these consists their reward: Mt. 6: "They have received their reward." Consequently he describes himself, saying, "But I have walked in my innocence"; as if to say, I ask this so that, just as you prepare evils for them, so you may prepare goods for me, as Ps. 83 says: "He will not deprive of good things those who walk in innocence." Consequently he asks to be freed from present evils. The evils that befall a man can be twofold; for they are either external evils, and from these he asks to be redeemed: hence he says, "Redeem me," as a slave from the evils that oppress me. Or concerning the redemption of the human race. Or they are interior evils, and from these he asks to be freed; hence he says, "Have mercy on me," because mercy properly regards interior evil: Prov. 14: "Sin makes peoples wretched."

[87014] "For my foot." Here is set forth the reason why he asks this; and it is twofold. One is from the past, which is the rectitude of life; hence he says, "My foot," that is, my affection or my progress, "has stood in the right path." Likewise, concerning the future, "I propose always to serve you"; hence he says, "In the churches I will bless you, O Lord," that is, before many: Ps. 39: "I have announced your justice in the great church." And he says in the plural, on account of the multitude of particular churches, as it is said in Rev. 3.
