Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 46
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 46

[87251] In the preceding Psalms the Psalmist expounded the glory of the King and of the kingdom; here he exhorts the foreign nations to be converted to God. And first he exhorts them to the praise of God. Second, to hope in God. Third, he teaches them the worship of God. The second begins at "hear these things." The third, at "the God of gods." The title is clear, because it has been explained above: "unto the end, for the sons of Korah, a Psalm of David." Concerning the first he does two things. First he exhorts all nations to the praise of God. Second, the matter of praise is set forth, at "the Lord is great." Concerning the first he does three things. First he sets forth the invitation to the praise of God. Second, the cause, at "because the Lord is most high." Third, he makes this cause manifest, at "God ascended." The praise of God ought to proceed from the joyfulness of the heart, just as it is also in our homeland. Is. 51: "Joy and gladness shall be found in her." This joy of heart is shown through an outward sign, of deed or word. First, therefore, he calls them to praise in deed. Second, in word. He says therefore, "all you nations" -- as if to say: God has done so many good things for us, therefore praise Him in deed: "clap your hands." Clapping of hands is done as a sign of exultation. Jer. 5: "The priests applauded with their hands." As if to say: clap, that is, show the exultation of the heart through the clapping of hands. And this is done when a man outwardly performs the services of God with joyfulness. Ps. 99: "Serve the Lord with gladness." Is. 55: "All the tongues of the nations shall clap their hand," that is, all peoples shall applaud. Likewise, praise Him in word; hence he says, "shout unto God with the voice of exultation," that is, with an outward voice demonstrating the interior affection. The Gloss: "A jubilation is an ineffable joy, which cannot be kept silent, yet cannot be expressed, because it exceeds comprehension." And such is the goodness of God, which cannot be expressed; and if expressed, it is nevertheless expressed imperfectly. And so Jeremiah said, Jer. 1: "Ah, ah, ah! Behold, I know not how to speak." And the Church signifies this jubilation when it multiplies notes upon a single syllable. Ps. 65: "Shout joyfully unto God, all the earth; sing a psalm," etc.

[87252] "Because the Lord." Here the cause of praise is set forth, and the goods that flow from the greatness of God. And first the greatness of God is set forth. Second, the sign of His greatness. The greatness of God is commended in two ways. First, through the loftiness of His power. Second, through the majesty of His dominion. He says therefore: God is to be praised on account of the loftiness of His nature, "because the Lord is most high." Ps. 112: "The Lord is high above all nations," etc. And because lofty things are remote from us, someone might believe that He is not to be feared and that He does not exercise providence over us -- as certain fools have said, in whose person it is said in Job 22: "He walks about the poles of heaven and does not consider our affairs." And therefore he said: "As far as it depends on you, you have rendered the fear of Him void." But it is not so. He is most high because He is "terrible," because He surveys all things and punishes all things. Likewise He is to be feared on account of His dominion, because He is "a great king over all the earth." Ps. 23: "The earth is the Lord's," etc. He is great in the universality of His dominion, because "the kingdom of all ages," Ps. 144. Likewise in duration, because forever. Likewise in authority, because He is king of all kings. The sign of the greatness of this King is taken from the things He has done among us, and these are the benefits of God. First, in the subjection of others. Second, in the bestowal of goods. He says therefore, "He has subjected peoples to us." These are the words of the Church, to whom even temporally her enemies are made subject. Augustine in the Gloss: "For how many now run to the Church who are not yet Christians? They seek the help of the Church; they want temporal assistance, even if they do not yet wish to reign with us for eternity." Likewise, as words of the apostles: "He has subjected peoples to us," namely of the Jews, "and nations," that is, of the Gentiles, "under our feet." Is. 52: "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who announces and preaches peace." Likewise, Is. 45: "That I may subject nations before his face." Or, alternatively, "He has subjected peoples to us." Some are converted to the faith, and these are subjected by their own will. Others are not converted but live as pagans; and these are subjected under our feet, because they shall ultimately be crushed under our judicial power.

[87253] "He has chosen for us his inheritance." Here another benefit of the bestowal of goods is set forth. Where it should be noted that election implies the acceptance of one thing over another. Now the election of God can be understood from a twofold perspective. First, on the part of the goods that are bestowed. And thus distinguish: because some of the things bestowed are temporal, and some are spiritual. The ungodly and sinners receive temporal things as their portion. Wis. 2: "This is our portion." But the just receive as their portion God Himself. Ps. 15: "The Lord is the portion of my inheritance." God, then, "has chosen for Himself spiritual goods," that is, He has made us choose spiritual goods. He has therefore "chosen for us His inheritance." As if to say: since there are diverse portions of goods, He has chosen to give us His own inheritance. Second, the election of God is understood from the part of those to whom it is given. And thus there is a distribution: because although all are condemned in original sin, some are nevertheless saved by God's election. And so he says, "He has chosen for us," etc. And what this inheritance is, he shows: "the beauty of Jacob, which He has loved." Jerome's text has: "the glory" or "the pride of Jacob." And here pride is taken for excellence. Is. 60: "I will make you the pride," that is, the excellence, "of ages." Likewise "with glory," that is, with beauty or splendor; because in that eternal inheritance they shall be excellent, glorious, and beautiful. Jer. 31: "The Lord bless you, O beauty of justice." "Whom He has loved." Or, [taking "whom" as referring to] Jacob; as if to say: this inheritance is the glory of Jacob, that is, of the faithful, which glory God has loved, "because the Lord loves the gates of Zion." Or "the beauty of Jacob," that is, that which was represented through Jacob; because to him were represented the spiritual goods to which we have been chosen, namely the ladder he saw, and other such things. But the first reading is better. "God ascended with jubilation." Here he explains the cause and the order. He says that He is most high and a great king; and on account of this He is to be praised. But is He truly so high? Yes. And first he shows His excellence. Second, he shows the extent of His kingdom, at "sing praises." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth His excellence. Second, he draws a conclusion of exhortation, at "sing praises." I say therefore that He is most high, because He has ascended. But if He is most high, how did He ascend? Because He descended. Eph. 4: "He who ascended is the same one who," etc. But how did He ascend? "With jubilation." Jubilation is immense joy, and this jubilation signifies imperfect knowledge. There were two kinds of singers at the ascension of Christ: namely, the apostles and the angels. The apostles had imperfect knowledge of divine things; and so to them pertains the jubilation of joy at the ascension of Christ in glory. The angels were also there and had clear knowledge; and to them pertains not jubilation but a manifest announcement. And so he says, "and the Lord with the voice of a multitude." Hence the angels say, Acts 1: "Men of Galilee, why do you stand," etc. If therefore He is most high, "sing praises to our God," with the mouth; "sing praises to our King," with the heart. 1 Cor. 14: "I will sing with the spirit, I will sing also with the mind."

[87254] "Because He is King." Next he shows that He is a great King, and he shows this in reverse order. For first he induces them to sing praises to the King. Second, he assigns the cause. Third, he makes it manifest. I say therefore: sing praises to God, but again, sing praises to the King, because He is great. And he says "sing praises, sing praises" twice, because we honor with the same honor the humanity and divinity in Christ, since it is the same person. Jn. 5: "That all may honor the Son as they honor the Father." And he shows that praise is fitting, because He is "God, king of all the earth." And therefore you inhabitants of the earth should sing praises to Him. And he says "of all the earth" -- not of Judea only, or of Greece, but of the whole world. "But sing praises wisely," that is, with discernment. And sing praises not only with the mouth, but with a heart renewed interiorly; because "praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner," as is said in Sir. 15. Likewise, not with a troubled mind. Jas. 5: "Let him pray with an even mind." Likewise, continually. Is. 23: "Sing well, repeat the song frequently." Then he makes manifest how He is king of all the earth. And first he foretells the reign of Christ over all nations. Second, over all the princes of the nations. As if to say: I say that He is king of all the earth, because although He now reigns in Judea only, He shall nevertheless reign over all nations, because all nations shall be converted to God. Ps. 116: "Praise the Lord, all you nations." And the reason for this is that Christ is God, and now, ascending to the right hand of the Father, He sits upon His holy throne, that is, at the right hand of God. And thus nothing remains except that all be subject to Him. Dan. 7: "Dominion was given to Him." And not only are the nations subject to Him, but also their princes; hence he says, "the princes of the peoples," namely of all [peoples], "are gathered together," through faith and love, "with the God of Abraham." And he says "Abraham," because he was the beginning of belief in both Father and Son. Mt. 3: "God is able to raise up children of Abraham from these stones." Ps. 71: "The kings of Arabia," etc. And the reason why they have been gathered is that "the strong gods of the earth have been greatly exalted." And this can be understood in two ways. In one way, of the Jews; for they were gods, because they were instructed about God. Jn. 10: "He called them gods, to whom the word of God was spoken." Likewise they were strong, because steadfast in the faith of one God. But they were "of the earth," because their eyes and their affections were always on earthly things. These "have been exalted" through pride, "greatly," to such an extent that they refused the doctrine of Christ. And so the apostles went to the Gentiles. In another way, the "strong gods" are the apostles. They are called gods on account of their judicial power. And in the Old Testament judges were called gods. Ex. 22: "You shall not detract from the gods" -- "Bring them before the gods," that is, before the judges. And they are called strong, on account of their constancy in suffering. Rom. 8: "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" "Of the earth," that is, still existing in earthly things. 2 Cor. 4: "We have this treasure in earthen vessels." "And they have been greatly exalted" -- through preaching. Mk. 16: "They went forth and preached everywhere." Likewise through the working of miracles. Likewise through the attainment of glory. Jerome has: "because the gods are shields of the earth," because the apostles were the protectors of all peoples.
