Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 2
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 2

[86789] Having set forth the Psalm in which he described, as it were universally, the state and course of the human race, here he proceeds to his proper subject matter, namely his own tribulations signifying the tribulations of Christ. Concerning this he does three things. First, he implores divine help against imminent tribulations by praying. Second, he gives thanks after being heard, and this in the eighth Psalm: "O Lord, our Lord, how admirable is your name in all the earth!" Third, he shows the confidence conceived from this, and this in the tenth Psalm: "In the Lord I trust; how do you say to my soul, 'Flee to the mountain like a sparrow'?" In tribulations, moreover, a man can ask for two things. First, he asks to be delivered. Second, that his enemies be brought low; and this he does in the seventh Psalm: "O Lord my God, in you," etc. Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he implores help against those who trouble him. Second, against those who scheme to deceive, and this in the fifth Psalm: "My words." Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he commemorates the machinations of those rising against him. Second, he implores help against those already rising, and this in the third Psalm: "Lord, how they are multiplied." Third, confident of being heard, he invites others to trust in God; and this in the fourth Psalm: "When I called." But it should be noted that this entire Psalm contains nothing about prayer, but about the malice of those who rise up. Concerning this Psalm, it should be known in general that there was a twofold opinion about it. For some said that it is the same as the first Psalm, and this was the view of Gamaliel. And for this reason they said that just as that Psalm begins "Blessed is the man who," etc., so this one, as if it were part of it, ends "Blessed are all who trust in him," so that it would be, as it were, circular. But two things stand against this. First, because in that case there would not be one hundred and fifty Psalms. But to this it is answered that they add one which is found in many Psalters and begins "I was small," etc. And second, because in Hebrew the Psalms are arranged according to the order of the letters, so that which number a Psalm is immediately appears: for in the first there is aleph, to designate that it is the first; in the second there is beth, to designate that it is the second; in the third there is gimel, and so on for the others. Since, therefore, beth, which is the second letter in the order of the alphabet, is placed at the beginning of this Psalm, it is clear that it is the second Psalm, and Augustine holds this view. It must therefore be said that this Psalm in the order of the Psalms is the second, but the first with a title; and this is its title. A Psalm is properly named from the Psaltery, which is a certain ten-stringed instrument that is played by hand; hence it is derived from "to play," which means to touch with the hand, and it has its striking from above. Hence a Psalm is properly called a song that David sang, or caused to be sung, to the Psaltery. Mystically, however, by the ten-stringed Psaltery is signified the law of God, which consists in ten commandments, and it must be touched by hand, that is, by good works, and from above, because the commandments are to be fulfilled for the sake of the hope of eternal things; otherwise it would be touched from below. It is therefore a Psalm of David, because it was composed by him, and it treats of his kingdom as a figure of the kingdom of Christ. For through David, Christ is fittingly signified, because David means "strong of hand," and Christ is "the power of God" (1 Cor. 1). David is also called "desirable in appearance," and Christ is "the splendor of glory" (Heb. 1): he is the one "into whom the angels desire to look" (1 Pet. 1). "Why have the nations raged, and the peoples devised vain things?" This Psalm is divided into two parts. In the first, the machination of those plotting against the kingdom of David and of Christ is narrated. In the second, their repression is set forth, at "He who dwells in the heavens shall laugh at them." Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he narrates the rebellion of those who plot. Second, against whom they plot. Third, the purpose of those who plot. The second at "against the Lord." The third at "Let us break their bonds." First, then, historically it should be known that when a people stirs up rebellion, first a murmur arises among the people, then the support of the great comes to bring it to completion. First, therefore, he sets forth the endeavor of the murmuring people. Second, the support of the great, at "The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes assembled together." Among the people, moreover, some have less reason and are impetuous; others have more and are called cautious. The first are not moved by judgment to rebel, but rather by impulse; and therefore he says of these, "they raged," which is characteristic of beasts: Prov. 19: "As the roaring of a lion, so also is the anger of the king." The second are moved by deliberation; and therefore of these he says: "they devised vain things." Because "the thoughts of men are vain" (Ps. 93). A people is a multitude of men united by consent of law. And therefore the Jews are called a people, because they are with the law and under the law of God. Others are called nations, because they are not under the law of God. Or, literally, in the kingdom of David there were subjected nations and faithful Jews; and both were plotting against him; therefore he says: "Why have the nations raged, and the peoples devised vain things?" He does not ask but rebukes, as in Wis. 5: "What has pride profited us, or what has the boasting of riches brought us?" Likewise, the lesser could do nothing by themselves unless they had the support of the greater; hence he sets forth certain ones providing support: first by aiding with power, and regarding this he says: "The kings of the earth stood up, and the princes assembled together against the Lord and against his Christ"; as if to say, those raged, but others stood up, that is, were present for this malice. Likewise, some provided support by advising with wisdom; and regarding this he says, "assembled together," namely to take counsel. Jerome's text has "they conferred together." Jer. 5: "I will therefore go to the great men and speak to them, for they have known the way of the Lord and the judgment of their God," etc. Then when he says, "against the Lord and against his Christ," etc., he identifies those who suffer the rebellion. For he shows against whom the rebellion was directed: against the Lord and against his king. For kings are called Christs, that is, anointed ones: Ps. 104: "Do not touch my anointed ones." Whoever, therefore, rebels against a king appointed by God also rebels against God: Rom. 13: "Whoever resists authority resists the ordinance of God." And therefore he says, "against the Lord and against his Christ." 1 Sam. 8: "They have not rejected you, but me." Mystically, these things are said of Christ under the likeness of David: Acts 4: "Lord, you said through the mouth of our father, your servant David, 'Why have the nations raged,'" etc. "For they truly assembled in this city against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed," etc. And according to this, it should be understood that the nations, namely the soldiers, assembled against Christ; and the peoples, namely the Jews, devised vain things, believing they could kill him entirely, namely that he would not rise again; and the kings of the earth, namely Herod the Ascalonite, the earlier one, who killed the infants, and later Herod Antipas, his son, who consented with Pilate; and the princes, that is, Pilate, so that the plural is used for the singular by synecdoche. Or the chief priests assembled together, that is, in one wicked will, against the Lord and against his Christ.

[86790] Next he sets forth the purpose of those who plot; hence he says: "Let us break their bonds," etc. This is properly said, for the dominion of the king is called a yoke. In 3 Kings 12, it is said to Rehoboam that he should lighten the yoke that Solomon had imposed on them. For just as oxen are joined by a yoke for work, so men are joined for the dominion of the kingdom. But the yoke cannot be removed unless the bonds are loosened. The bonds in a kingdom are those by which the royal power is secured in the kingdom, such as soldiers, fortresses, and arms. First, therefore, it is necessary to dissolve these, and then to remove the yoke. Spiritually, in Christ the yoke is the law of charity: Mt. 11: "My yoke is sweet," etc. The bonds are the virtues: hope, faith, charity: Eph. 4: "Eager to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace." Sir. 6: "Her bonds are a healing binding." That the conscience of man should not be under the yoke of the law of Christ cannot happen unless these bonds are first broken: which those do who say to God, "Depart from us; we do not want the knowledge of your ways," etc. (Job 21). Jer. 2: "Of old you broke your yoke, you burst your bonds, and you said, 'I will not serve.'" Or this is said in the person of David, from Christ to his servants: the Gloss says, as if they plot thus, but "O my servants, let us break," etc.; but this does not fit the intended meaning.

[86791] Then when he says, "He who dwells," the suppression of those plotting against the kingdom of David is set forth. And concerning this he does two things. First, it is shown how they are suppressed by the Lord. Second, how by his Christ, at "But I have been appointed," etc. Against these -- namely the Lord and his Christ -- they plotted, as was said. Concerning the first, note four things: namely derision, scorn, angry speech, and disturbance. For just as a boy of no strength and power, if he fights against a giant, is laughed at by the giant, so if anyone of no power wishes to plot against him who dwells in the heavens, he is laughed at by him. Job 35: "Look up to heaven and behold, and contemplate the sky, that it is higher than you. If you sin, what will you harm him?" And if the powerless one persists, then the one who is more powerful rebukes and scorns him. For derision is done with the mouth, according to Jerome in the Gloss; but scorn with a wrinkled and contracted nose, arising from a certain slight indignation. Prov. 1: "I also will laugh at your destruction and will mock, when what you feared comes upon you." But if he in no way desists, he proceeds to vengeance; and therefore he says, "Then he will speak to them in his wrath," that is, he will pronounce the sentence of vengeance against them. For wrath does not befall God, but what belongs to the creature is sometimes attributed to the Creator by anthropopathy, which is a human pre-passion. Ps. 6: "Lord, not in your wrath," etc. Finally, the sentence is carried out; and therefore he says, "and in his fury he will trouble them," in heart and in soul in eternal punishment: that is, by his own power he will punish them. Job 15: "When he moves to seek bread, he knows that the day of darkness is prepared in his hand; tribulation will terrify him, and anguish will surround him." These four things will occur at the judgment. For he will deride by placing them on the left: Mt. 25. He will scorn, saying: "I was hungry," etc., reproaching them. He will speak in wrath, sentencing: "Depart, you cursed, into eternal fire," etc. He will trouble them, executing the sentence: "These will go into eternal punishment," etc.

[86792] There follows next the showing of how they are suppressed by his Christ, when he says, "But I." Now the people, the nations, and the princes rose up against the Christ of David. First, therefore, he shows how Christ relates to the people. Second, how to the nations, at "The Lord said to me." Third, how to the kings, at "And now, O kings, understand," etc. He says, therefore: "But I have been appointed king by him over Zion, his holy mountain," etc. It should be known, moreover, that he was appointed king by God in Jerusalem, and by his preaching he brought the people back. As if to say: they act thus, but they cannot achieve their aim, because I have been appointed, that is, established as king over Zion, that is, over the Jewish people, who were in Jerusalem, whose citadel is Zion -- by him, namely by God: Ps. 117: "The Lord is my helper; I will not fear what man may do to me." Job 17: "Place me, O Lord, beside you, and let any man's hand fight against me." I have been appointed king, moreover, over Zion, his holy mountain, not for my own sake, but to govern the people according to the law of God; and therefore he says, "proclaiming his precept." Mystically, however, he was appointed king, according to Jer. 23: "A king shall reign and be wise," etc. Zion, that is, the Church of the Jews, which is called the holy mountain, because it first received the rays of the sun: Mt. 15: "I was not sent except to the sheep," etc. 2 Sam. 19: "Do I not know that today I am made king over Israel?" "Proclaiming the precept," that is, the Gospel. Or that special precept of which it is said in Jn. 13: "A new commandment I give you, that you love one another"; and Jn. 15: "This is my commandment," etc. This precept he personally preached to the Jews, that is, in his own person: Mt. 4: "Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues and preaching the Gospel of the kingdom." Rom. 15: "I say that Christ Jesus was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God," etc.

[86793] Then when he says, "The Lord," from the same history it is shown how he relates to the nations. And concerning this he does two things. First, he shows that it befits Christ to have power over the nations. Second, he sets forth the exercise of that power: "You shall rule them." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he shows by what right power over the nations belongs to him. Second, he sets forth the reception of that power, at "I will give you the nations." He says, therefore, "The Lord said to me." This is not completely fulfilled in David; and therefore it is understood of Christ, to whom dominion over the nations belongs by a twofold right: namely hereditary and merited. First, therefore, he sets forth the right. Second, the merit, at "Ask," etc. Now Christ is king of all, as is said in Heb. 1, and this belongs to him because he is the Son: Gal. 4: "If a son, then an heir through God." And therefore he treats of the eternal generation of Christ, in which three things are noted. First, the mode of generation. Second, the property of sonship. Third, the eternity of the begotten Son. The mode is shown in that he says: "The Lord said": because, namely, he proceeded by way of intellect. The generation of each thing is according to its mode. The mode of the divine nature is not carnal but intellectual; indeed, it is understanding itself. Second, generation is a procession according to origin that is found in intelligible reality, which is according to the conception of the word proceeding from the intellect; and this is to speak a word in the heart. And therefore he says, "The Lord said," as if, "by saying he generated me." Hence the Son is the Word that the Father spoke, that is, produced by begetting. The property, however, is shown in that he says, "my Son" -- not adoptive, as those of whom it is said in Jn. 1: "He gave them the power to become children of God," etc. -- but by the property of nature. Hence "You are my Son": natural, singular, consubstantial. Mt. 17: "This is my beloved Son." Eternity is set forth in what he adds: "Today I have begotten you," that is, eternally. For it is not a new but an eternal generation; and therefore he says, "today I have begotten you," because "today" signifies the present, and what is eternal always is. He also says, "I have begotten you," and not "I beget," to designate the perfection of generation; for since generation is without motion, to be begotten and to have been begotten are simultaneous. He also says "today" to designate the presentness with clarity that belong to Christ, who "dwells in unapproachable light" (1 Tim. 6), and who truly is, in whom nothing is past or future or obscure, but all is clear.

[86794] Above was set forth the privilege of eternal generation, from which dominion over the nations belongs to Christ by hereditary right; here he shows how he acquired it through his merit. Here it should be considered that just as in natural things forms are infused according to the disposition of matter, so God bestows gratuitous gifts: Phil. 2: "It is God who works in us both to will and to accomplish," etc. And therefore he wills that we receive gifts by asking and praying. This example he wished to show through Christ, because he willed that he should ask for what belonged to him by hereditary right. Now this petition for the calling of the nations can be understood in two ways. First, through prayer, because he prayed for them: Jn. 17: "I do not pray for them only, but for those who will believe in me through their word." Also through his passion: Heb. 9: "So that, with death intervening for the redemption of those transgressions which were under the former testament, those who are called might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance." This petition was not in vain, because "in all things he was heard for his reverence" (Heb. 5). Hence the granting follows, when he adds, "and I will give you the nations." Here it should be noted that no one comes to Christ except by the gift of the Father: Jn. 6: "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him." The giving of the Gentiles is a pure gift, for the Jews were, as it were, given back, because they had been given before: Rom. 15: "I say that Jesus Christ was a minister of the circumcision," etc. And therefore he says, "I will give you the nations," so that they may be subject to you and be your inheritance: Phil. 2: "That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, on earth, and under the earth." Ps. 15: "My inheritance is glorious to me." Likewise, he does not have them as servants have them -- as Peter or Paul -- but as Lord: Heb. 3: "And Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant, as a testimony of those things which were to be said; but Christ as a Son in his own house, which house we are." And therefore he says, "your possession": Is. 49: "That you might possess the scattered inheritances, that you might say to those who are bound, 'Come out,' and to those who are in darkness, 'Be revealed.'" "The ends of the earth": because throughout the whole world the Church has been built. But afterward through Nicholas the heretic and Muhammad they returned to unbelief. Or it is awaited to be established: Is. 49: "It is too small a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to restore the remnants of Israel. I have given you as a light to the nations, that you may be my salvation to the ends of the earth." Heb. 1: "Whom he appointed heir of all things," etc.

[86795] Then when he says, "You shall rule them," the execution of power is set forth. And according to the historical sense, it could be explained that because he was appointed king of the Jews, he also ruled over certain nations that he had subjugated, as a figure of the universal dominion of Christ. But because citizens are governed differently -- for citizens are governed by a regime of mercy -- and subjugated enemies differently, namely by a regime of severe justice, therefore he says: "with a rod of iron." But it is better that it be referred to the spiritual dominion of Christ. For it is necessary that he who rules have a rod: Ps. 44: "The rod of direction is the rod of your kingdom." For kings are necessary for this purpose: to have a rod of discipline with which to punish offenders. And because Christ was appointed king by God to govern the people, therefore he says: "You shall rule them with a rod of iron." And he adds "of iron" to designate the inflexible discipline of justice. For the rod by which the Jews were ruled was not of iron, because they frequently cast it off by worshiping idols. But this is the iron rod by which he rules the nations, because they will no longer depart from the dominion of Christ, when the fullness of the nations has entered: Rev. 12: "The woman brought forth a male child, who was to rule all the nations with a rod of iron." "And you shall shatter them like a potter's vessel"; which is explained by Jer. 18: "I went down to the potter's house, and behold, he was working at his wheel, and the vessel that he was making of clay was broken in his hands. And he turned and made it another vessel. And afterward: as clay in the hand of the potter, so are you in my hand." For when a potter's vessel is fresh, it is easily broken from a bad form and restored to a good one. The Jews had already been converted; hence they were not to be shattered, for their faith and ours are the same. But the Gentiles were idolaters, and therefore they were to be shattered, so that they might receive another form, that is, another true faith. Or alternatively: "with a rod of iron" refers to the good, and "like a potter's vessel" to the wicked, who are finally to be crushed: Lk. 2: "Behold, this one is set for the fall and the rising of many." Is. 30: "Suddenly, when it is not expected, his destruction will come, and they will be broken as a potter's vessel is shattered with an exceedingly great shattering," etc., so that "he who is righteous, let him be justified still, and he who is filthy, let him be filthy still" (Rev., last chapter).

[86796] Then when he says, "And now," it is shown how he relates to the kings. He restrains them, moreover, by admonishing and drawing them to the service of God. Concerning this, therefore, he does two things. First, he sets forth the admonition. Second, he assigns the reason for the admonition, at "lest he become angry." He admonishes to three things: to the truth of doctrine, to the humility of service, and to the acceptance of correction. The second, at "serve." The third, at "embrace." Now truth can be known by someone in two ways: either through discovery, and such persons are said to understand well; or through instruction, and such are said to be well teachable. Likewise, there is a twofold degree among rulers. For to some is committed universal governance, and they are called kings. To others, some particular judgment, and they are called judges. The former, therefore, he exhorts to understanding, for "the intelligent man will possess guidance" (Prov. 1). The latter, to being instructed, so that they may receive from others the form of judgment; and therefore he says, "understand and be instructed": Wis. 6: "Hear, O kings, and understand; learn, O judges of the ends of the earth."

[86797] Then when he says, "serve": after understanding, he fittingly sets forth service, because the service of God, which is latria, is the profession of faith. And therefore one must first believe, and afterward confess and serve: Rom. 10: "With the heart one believes unto justice, and with the mouth," etc. He says, moreover, "the Lord": for he who serves a man, it suffices that he be outwardly subject to him by obeying; but he who serves God must be inwardly subject to him according to the soul, having a good affection: Ps. 61: "Now my soul shall be subject to God," etc. He says, moreover, "in fear," which is holy and abiding, and does not allow one to sin, so that "let him who thinks he stands take heed lest he fall" (1 Cor. 10). And it should be noted according to Augustine that a king serves God insofar as he is a man, by living justly in himself; but insofar as he is a king, by enacting laws against those things that are against God's justice. Hence in this Psalm the state of the Church is prefigured: for in the beginning the kings of the earth made laws against Christ and Christians, but afterward they established laws for Christ. And the first is shown when he said, "they stood up"; the second at "serve the Lord." But lest this service should seem to be misery, he added: "and rejoice in him with trembling." For the fear of the Lord is not of misery but of joy; on which account Lev. 10: "Aaron answered Moses: How can they please God with a sorrowful mind?" But lest this joy should give rise to presumption or negligence, he adds, "with trembling," which is a sudden fear: Phil. 2: "Work out your salvation with fear and trembling." Next he admonishes to acceptance, when he adds, "embrace": that no one may live as he pleases, but as is fitting. And therefore he says "discipline" -- precepts and good morals, or adversities as a protection and defense: Ps. 17: "And your discipline," etc. And the reason for the admonition is given: "lest he become angry." And there is a twofold reason: to avoid punishment, and to obtain glory, at "Blessed are all who trust in him." He says, moreover, "lest at any time," on account of God's patience, because in this age he endures for a long time: Ps. 7: "Will he be angry every day?" saying, "unless you are converted"; as if to say, keep the admonition lest the time of punishment come. "Lest you perish from the right way," namely of justice and the fellowship of the good, which is very painful for those who have tasted the sweetness of justice. Jerome's text has, "lest you perish from the way"; "right" is not there. For when a man is in the world, he is as on a way: for if he falls, he can rise again. Nor is that said to perish which can be restored -- even what does not fall from the way but on the way. But if one perishes from the way, it is irreparable (Job 5). "And because no one understands, they shall perish forever." And therefore he says "when."

[86798] Another reason is set forth, which is for obtaining glory; as if to say, embrace discipline, because "when it blazes forth," etc. Blessed will be all who trust in him. He rightly says, "when it blazes forth": for now it does not blaze, since he chastises as a father; but in the future it will consume and blaze, when he punishes with eternal punishment. Is. 30: "Behold, the name of the Lord comes from afar; burning is his fury and heavy to bear; his lips are filled with indignation, and his tongue is like a devouring fire." He says, moreover, "shortly," because he will not examine individual sins separately but all at once. Hence that judgment will take place shortly, nor will it last for a thousand years, as Lactantius said: 1 Cor. 15: "In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet," and then all the good will be changed into the glory of immortality. Hence, "blessed are those who trust"; as if to say: the vengeance will not only not touch those who trust, but they will be blessed, because they will attain the kingdom. This blessedness or glory will appear greater from the punishment of the wicked: Jer. 17: "Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, and the Lord will be his confidence," etc.