Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 40
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 40

[87204] In the preceding Psalm, the Psalmist showed his confidence with respect to God; here, however, he asks from God a mercy that strengthens. The title is: "Unto the end, a Psalm of David." This title has already been explained above, namely that this Psalm which David composed leads us to the end, that is, to Christ, because it treats of his Passion with respect to certain things. It is said, however, in the Gloss that according to Jerome in his original text the title is: "Understanding, for the sons of Korah"; and this is a new title among the titles of the Psalms. It should therefore be known that, as is read in Num. 16, when Dathan and Abiram made a schism against Moses for the leadership of the people, then Korah rose up against Aaron for the leadership of the priesthood, and he was burned. Not all of his family, however, consented to this, and therefore those who did not consent from among them survived; hence in the time of David, ministries were given to them among the singers. And it is understood that this Psalm was in those days ordained to be sung. But it should be noted that in those Psalms where "understanding for the sons of Korah" is said, and is said according to the letter in all those in which "understanding" is placed, it is given to understand that through that Psalm the people are incited to understand the divine benefits or certain secrets, such as that verse, Ps. 94: "Understand, you senseless ones." And there, Ps. 78: "Attend, O my people," etc. Mystically, Korah is interpreted as Calvary, and Christ was crucified at the place of Calvary; and therefore this Psalm is attributed to the sons of the Passion, that is, of the cross of Christ. And these are they who have crucified their flesh, as is said in Gal. 5. The intention of the Psalmist is that he asks for divine mercy. This Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. In the first he asks for divine mercy in general; in the second in particular, at "But you, O Lord." Concerning the first he does two things. First he asks for mercy; second he introduces the necessity of asking for mercy, at "My enemies." Concerning the first he does two things. First he shows to whom mercy is owed; second, perceiving in himself that he deserves mercy, he asks for it, at "I said," because Mt. 5: "Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." Therefore mercy is owed to the merciful for a twofold reason. First, from divine acceptance, because God accepts mercy, through which man becomes an imitator of God. Lk. 6: "Be merciful," etc. Second, from the prayer of the saints. Sir. 29: "Store up almsgiving in the heart of the poor, and it shall pray for you." And this he does at "The Lord preserve him." Concerning the first, he announces the merit; second, the reward. He says therefore, "Blessed is he who understands concerning the needy and the poor." Blessed is the one who is merciful, who has mercy on the needy and the poor. Prov. 14: "He who has mercy on the poor shall be blessed." And he says, "who understands"—he does not say "who helps," because, as has been said, one ought to be merciful after the manner of God; but God does not wait to be always asked. Hence he comes to the aid of a desire before being asked; and therefore he is truly merciful who not only helps those who ask, but also helps the one in need before being asked. Job 31: "If I denied what the poor desired, if I made the eyes of the widow wait." The needy is one who needs to receive from another; the poor is one who has little. Jerome has, "who considers," etc., that is, who takes upon himself the care of the affairs of the poor. Job 29: "I was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame." Mystically, if this is referred to Christ, blessed is the Christian if he is a son of Korah, that is, of the cross of Christ through meditation, who understands, that is, who has his understanding brought into service, understanding concerning the needy and the poor, that is, the benefit which Christ accomplished through the cross. Lam. 3: "Remember my poverty and my transgression, the wormwood and the gall." He sets forth the first when he says, "In the evil day the Lord will deliver him." Days according to their nature are good, because they are made by God. Ps. 119: "By your ordinance the days continue." But they are called evil on account of the evils that happen in them. Eph. 5: "Redeeming the time, because the days are evil." And he says, "In the evil day," that is, in a day of some evil tribulation. Now there are many kinds of evil days: namely, of trial. Sir. 11: "In the day of good things, be not unmindful of evils." The greatest of evils is eternal damnation, which threatens man at the judgment, either particular, namely death, or at the universal judgment, that is, at the end of the world. And that day is evil on which such damnation takes place, that is, "that day is a day of wrath, a day of tribulation and anguish," etc. On this evil day the Lord delivers the merciful. Mt. 25: "I was hungry," etc. "Come, blessed," etc. Not that mercy alone without other virtues delivers a man, but because through mercy a man makes satisfaction for his sins.

[87205] "The Lord preserve him." Here he shows how one merits mercy from the prayer of the saints, who pray for the merciful. And a prayer is set forth for the merciful person in a state of prosperity; second, for one in a state of adversity. In a state of prosperity a man needs two things: namely, to be advanced and preserved in good; second, to be freed from evils. Now there is a threefold good: namely, the good of nature, the good of grace, and the good of glory. The first, namely the good of nature, he asks to be preserved for him; hence he says, "The Lord preserve him," namely in the good he possesses, namely in the good of nature. Ps. 56: "Preserve me, O Lord," lest the good of nature be corrupted by sin or by threatening tribulations. He asks for the good of grace to be given when he says, "and give him life"; for through grace man has spiritual life. Now this life is to be considered, and it is possessed through formed faith. Hab. 2: "My just one lives by faith." Gal. 2: "And that I live now in the flesh, I live in the faith of the Son of God." Even without this life, namely of grace, our life is death. 1 Tim. 5: "She who lives in pleasures is dead." As to the third good, namely of glory, he says, "and make him blessed upon the earth." If this is understood of perfect beatitude, then "upon the earth" means the land of the living. Ps. 27: "I believe that I shall see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living." Mt. 5: "Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess the land." But if it is understood of the beatitude of this life, insofar as we taste something eternal in our minds, as is said in Phil. 3: "Our citizenship is in heaven," then "make him blessed upon the earth" means in this earth, namely by participation in that beatitude. "And deliver him not into the souls of his enemies." Here he asks to be freed from evils. Among all evils, the greatest evil is to fall into the hands of enemies. Ps. 59: "Deliver me from my enemies, O my God," because enemies out of hatred persecute and afflict. Hence he says, "Do not deliver him into the souls," that is, into the wills, of his enemies, whose nature is to always hate, which is nothing other than to will evil. When, therefore, someone is subjected to the wicked, he is delivered into the will of the enemy. Or, "into the souls of his enemies," that is, into the power of the Devil and his ministers.

[87206] "The Lord bring him aid." Here is set forth a prayer for the merciful person in adversity. And first he asks for divine help or support; second he alleges the necessity of this. He says therefore, "The Lord bring him aid upon his bed of sorrow." He prays for the merciful person, or for the just man, a son of Korah simply, that the Lord give him life and make him blessed upon the earth. Second, that he preserve him and not deliver him into the souls of his enemies. And from this someone could infer that the merciful person would in no way be afflicted. Hence, to exclude this, he says that sometimes his bed is filled with sorrows, and this happens to the merciful person sometimes for correction. Job 33: "He rebukes sometimes through pain on the bed." Or for humiliation, as the thorn of the flesh was given to Paul, 2 Cor. 12. Or for testing, as in Job throughout, and in Tobit. And therefore he says, "The Lord bring him aid," that is, the merciful person in tribulation, "upon the bed," literally on which he lies, or on which he rests. 1 Cor. 10: "God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted beyond what you can bear." And that you bring him aid, a great necessity demands this, because "You have turned all his bed in his sickness." And he speaks here after the likeness of one with a fever, who finds no place on the bed where he can rest, but continually turns himself. And therefore he says, "You have turned"; as if to say: he needs aid because his infirmity is so great that he is continually turned about in bed. And this is according to the literal sense; yet simply everything through which he found rest in temporal things has been turned to bitterness for him, because God places bitterness in them, so that, having despised them, one may be converted to God. Eccl. 2: "And when I turned to all the works which my hands had wrought, I saw in all things vanity." And because to the merciful mercy is owed, being conscious of his mercy, I ask for mercy. First, therefore, he asks for mercy absolutely; second he shows in what respect he especially asks for it; third he assigns the cause of the petition. He says therefore, "O Lord, I said, have mercy on me"; as if to say: I do not have recourse to justice, but to mercy, because our salvation is not in our own acts of justice. Is. 64: "All our acts of justice are like a polluted garment." But in what does he ask for mercy? Where misery especially is. And this, namely mercy, is given where there is the highest beatitude, because beatitude does not consist in bodily things, since bodily things are ordered to ultimate beatitude. Therefore the chief misery is not in bodily things but in those things that have in themselves a disposition contrary to beatitude, such as in adulteries, thefts, murders, and other sins; and whoever does such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God, as the Apostle says in Gal. 5, but is damned. Prov. 14: "Sin makes peoples wretched." For sin has disordered the body, and the body has disordered the soul. Wis. 9: "The body which is corrupted weighs down the soul." And this health is had from God alone. Wis. 16: "Neither herb nor poultice healed them, but your word, O Lord." And the reason for this petition is: "because I have sinned against you." But do sins merit mercy? No. This, therefore, is connected in such a way that the word "because" designates the matter of mercy, not its merit. There is no misery where there is not a place for mercy. And therefore, because I am wretched, I ask for mercy. Or the word "because" denotes the meritorious cause, and thus, because the confession of sin is the merit of mercy, therefore he says: I ask for mercy because I confess that I have sinned against you. Prov. 28: "He who hides his sins," etc. "But he who confesses shall obtain mercy." Or otherwise, "because I have sinned against you"; as if to say: why do I ask for mercy? Because you alone are the one who can heal, because the injury and sin were committed against you; therefore remission pertains to you. And in every sin God is offended. And this verse is sung at the third hour, because by the faith and operation of the Trinity sin is remitted.

[87207] "My enemies have spoken." Above, the Psalmist asked for healing mercy; here, however, he sets forth the necessity of such a petition, which is caused by enemies. And according to the mystical sense, because the literal is plain, in this passage these words are spoken in the person of Christ. Concerning which he does three things. First he sets forth the malice of the wicked desiring his harm. Second he sets forth their scheming to entrap him, at "And if he came in." Third he sets forth their deliberation, at "Against me, because the enemy." First he desires to harm. Second he lies in ambush. Third he considers how it may be accomplished. He says therefore, "My enemies have spoken," in their heart or with their mouth, "evil things to me." Mt. 12: "The evil man out of an evil treasure brings forth," etc. And these evil words express their desire for the death of Christ, or of the just man. Hence it is said, "When will he die?" This is the mode of expressing desire. Ps. 42: "When shall I come and appear?" etc. Wis. 2: "Let us condemn him to a most shameful death." And they wished the death of Christ so that his fame, which was then celebrated, might be extinguished. Jer. 11: "Let us destroy him from the land of the living, and let his name be remembered no more." Hence they say, "And his name shall perish." But the contrary happened, because through death he was more exalted, and more were converted after the death of Christ. Jn. 12: "Unless the grain of wheat falling into the ground dies, it brings forth much fruit." And although the wicked lie in ambush against the good to extinguish their name, yet, as is said in Prov. 10: "The memory of the just is with praises." And sinners procure this by lying in ambush. Thus he first sets forth the manner of ambush. Second he shows the effect of the ambush, at "He came in." Concerning the first he does three things. For first he proposes the deceitful entry. Second, the feigned speech. Third, the insidious disposition. He says therefore, "If he came in to see me." Jerome has, "to visit"; as if to say: they did not come for the sake of friendship, but for the sake of spying. Thus the leaders of the Jews came to catch Jesus. Thus also after the death of Christ, many entered the Church to catch and lie in ambush against holy men. This is what the Apostle says in Gal. 2: "On account of false brethren secretly brought in, who crept in to spy out our liberty." As to the second he says, "He spoke vain things," that is, the people of the Jews spoke false things against Christ, because with their mouth they feigned sweet words. Mt. 22: "Master, we know that you are truthful." And inwardly they plotted death. Ps. 12: "They have spoken vanities, each one to his neighbor; with deceitful lips they have spoken with a double heart." As to the third he says, "His heart gathered iniquity to itself." An insidious disposition is one that gathers words with which to harm the just man. For these do not act like bees that gather honey, but like dung beetles that gather dung. But the good gather honey, because from divine sweetness they sweeten others. And therefore he says, "His heart gathered iniquity to itself." And he says, "to itself," that is, against itself. Prov. 1: "They lie in ambush against their own blood." Or, "to itself," that is, to achieve its own desire, because if they could catch him in some evil, they would greatly rejoice. Sir. 18: "If you grant to your soul its desires, it will make you a joy to your enemies." Thus they spoke against Christ, Mt. 27: "We have remembered that that deceiver," etc. Next the effect of the ambush is shown, because going out they slandered; hence he says, "He went out and spoke to the same effect." He went out either from pretense, or from malice, or from familiarity, or from friendship; because before he was and appeared as a friend, and thus he spoke to the same effect, that is, falsehood, as before, and words of falsity. Or he went out from the bosom of truth, or from the friendship he feigned, or from the Church, or from the company of Christ. Jn. 6: "Many of his disciples went back."

[87208] "Against me." Here he shows their evil counsel, how they might do harm. And first he sets forth the counsel of enemies. Second he shows that in this also some good friends concurred, at "The man of my peace." And first he sets forth the order of deliberating, showing that first the counselors assemble. Second they discuss what they deliberate about. Third they determine what is to be done. And he describes these three things here. He says therefore, "All my enemies whispered against me." The Gloss says, "He went out." And after follows, "To the same effect," etc. And this is found in the text of Jerome, yet it matters not. And he says, "They whispered," that is, they spoke silently; and this is the manner especially of counselors, and especially of evil counsels and evil men, who do this in secret. Lev. 19: "You shall not be a slanderer nor a whisperer among the peoples." Sir. 28: "The whisperer and the double-tongued is accursed," etc. And he says, "Against me." And thus they are not good counsels but evil. Ps. 36: "He has meditated iniquity on his bed." And therefore "they devised evil things against me." Ps. 1: "Blessed is the man who has not gone," etc. "They determined an unjust word against me," that is, an unjust thing. This, therefore, they determined in their council. Jn. 11: "It is expedient for you that one man should die for the people." And from that hour they plotted, etc. Mt. 21: "This is the heir; come, let us kill him." Wis. 2: "Let us condemn him to a most shameful death." This unjust word is found in Jer. 18: "You know, O Lord, their counsel against me unto evil and death." "Shall he who sleeps rise again?" Here he sets forth the reasoning behind their wicked determination. The word "not" is superfluous; as if to say: he who sleeps will not rise again; as if to say: if we kill him, he will not rise. Wis. 2: "There is no one who has been known to have returned from the dead." And therefore they believed the resurrection to be a deception. Or otherwise: "Shall he who sleeps," etc., so that the word "not" is construed with "rise again," and the sense is that these are the words of the Church taunting them; as if to say: you determined to kill him, but you did this in vain, because he will rise again. Hence he says, "Shall he who sleeps not rise again?" And he says "sleeps," because this is also said in Dan. 12: "Many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake." For simply speaking, the death of Christ was a sleep, because he himself laid down his life in death, and he died not by violence but by his own will. And therefore he had the power to take up his soul again by the power of his divinity. 2 Cor. 13: "Although he died from weakness, yet he lives by the power of God."

[87209] "Even the man of my peace, in whom I trusted." Above, the Psalmist set forth the counsel of enemies plotting the death of Christ; here, however, he introduces the counsel of friends. And because Christ himself, in Jn. 13, introduces this word concerning Judas, therefore let us here explain this of Christ. Where he does two things. First the condition of Judas is described. Second, his guilt. The condition of the person of Judas is described from three things that aggravate the sin: because he was a friend, because he was familiar, and because he had received benefits. He says therefore, as to the first: "Even the man of my peace." He said above that he slept, at the instigation of the traitor. Or, "They determined an unjust word against me," the enemies. But this is not surprising, because "the man of my peace," because Judas was reckoned among his friends. This prophecy was fulfilled in deed, because he betrayed Christ with a kiss, which is a sign of friendship and peace. Hence the Lord said in Lk. 22: "Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?" Ps. 28: "They speak peace with their neighbor," etc. Jer. 20: "I heard the insults of many, and terror on every side, from all the men who were at peace with him, and watching his side." Likewise he was a familiar; hence, "in whom I trusted." But was Christ deceived in his hope? No. And therefore he says, "in whom I trusted," that is, in whom I seemed to trust, that is, to confide, because he had committed to him the management of his affairs. Or, "in whom I trusted," that is, of such a condition that I bore myself toward him in such a way that I ought to have been able to trust in him. But sometimes one believes he can trust in one whom he considers a friend and in whom he ought to confide, and yet is deceived. Jer. 9: "Do not have confidence in any brother of yours." Mic. 7: "Do not trust a friend, and do not confide in a leader." Or, "in whom I trusted," in my members who trusted in Christ. Mt. 25: "What you did to one of these my least ones, you did to me." As to the third he says, "who ate my bread," because Christ designated him with the sign of bread. Jn. 13: "He to whom I shall give the dipped bread." And although Judas ate the bread of Christ, yet he proceeded against him. Sir. 29: "He will feed and give drink to the ungrateful." Or, "my bread," that is, my teaching. Gen. 49: "Asher, his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties." Such bread is the bread of Christ, which is rich on account of the sweetness of his teaching. Ps. 119: "How sweet," etc. "He has greatly supplanted me." Behold the sin. Jerome has: "He has lifted up his heel against me." And he speaks after the likeness of one who wishes to completely crush someone; as if to say: he attempted to utterly destroy me. And the diversity of translations seems to have arisen from an equivocation, because what is lifted up on high is magnified. Or, "He has greatly supplanted me," that is, he committed a great act of treachery against me, because he brought about my death. Jer. 9: "Every supplanter shall be supplanted." Amos 5: "They hated the one who rebuked in the gate."

[87210] "But you." Christ has now set forth his petition in general; here, however, he shows in what respect he asks for mercy. Hence he says: they have disturbed me, but there remains nothing except that I have recourse to God; and therefore he says, "But you, O Lord, have mercy on me." Mercy ought to be where there is misery; now Christ was made a partaker of our misery, not as to guilt but as to punishability, and especially as to the punishment of death. And therefore, "Have mercy on me." Ps. 89: "My mercy I will not take from him." But in what respect he asks for mercy, he shows when he says, "Raise me up"; as if to say: they say he will not rise again, but you raise me up. But did not Christ rise by his own power, since he says "Raise me up"? Indeed it seems that he did, because the Psalmist says in the person of Christ, "I have slept and I have risen," Ps. 3. It must be said that Christ according as he is man did not have the power to rise, but according to the power of the divinity, which is the same in the Father and the Son. And therefore if he rose by the power of the Father, he rose by his own power. And he asks from the Father, as man, what he had as God, to show that this is accomplished by the power of the divinity. "And I will repay them." Here is set forth the effect of this. Christ had a twofold power after the resurrection, because in heaven and on earth; and therefore he repaid them with temporal captivity, because they were scattered throughout the world, and he will repay them in the future with damnation. Jn. 5: "He gave him power to execute judgment." Jerome has: "Raise me up and I will repay you"; as if to say: this is the fruit of the resurrection, that having been raised I will bring many to the knowledge of your name. Ps. 116: "What shall I render to the Lord," etc.

[87211] "In this I know." Here he sets forth his confidence of being heard. And first he sets forth that God willed him, that is, it was pleasing to the Father's will in him. Hence he says, "that you have willed me." Mt. 3: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased." Is. 42: "My soul is pleased in him." Likewise he says, "My enemy shall not rejoice over me," that is, Judas; and even if he rejoiced at his death, he will not finally rejoice, because he will be saddened at the resurrection. Mic. 7: "Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy, because I have fallen; I shall rise again." And this text can be arranged in two ways. In one way, so that the first is the argument for the second, and the sense is: from this, that I consider that I am acceptable to you. In another way, so that the second is the cause of the first, and the sense is: because my enemy will not be able to rejoice over me, I have known that you have willed me. But because he needed some sign, he says, "I have known," that is, I have made known, or because others have known this. "But you have upheld me because of my innocence," etc. Here, having been heard, he gives thanks. And first he confesses the benefit. Second he adds praise, at "Blessed." In the benefit he confesses all that pertains to himself. For first he sets forth the merit. Second he shows the benefit of the resurrection. Third, the state of the risen one. Fourth, the exultation. As to his merit, let us consider his innocence; hence he says, "You have upheld me because of my innocence." 1 Pet. 2: "He committed no sin." Ps. 26: "But I have walked in my innocence." And from this merit he says he was upheld, or taken up. He does not say this of the assumption into the unity of the person, because that assumption was not from the merits of the man Christ himself, but from pure grace; hence it was accomplished by the operation of the Holy Spirit. Rather, he says this of the reception from the dead, by which he rose. Ps. 3: "But you, O Lord, are my upholder." And he says, "You have upheld," namely my soul from the dead, and my flesh from the tomb. But in what manner was he upheld? Was it to mortal life, like Lazarus? No; but he was upheld to the state of immortality. Hence he says, "And you have confirmed me in your sight forever," that is, in the state of immortality. Rom. 6: "Christ, rising from the dead, dies no more." And still more: because he established him before his sight. Heb. 9: "He entered into heaven itself, that he may appear before the face of God for us." And this "forever," that is, always.

[87212] "Blessed be the Lord." Here he sets forth praise, and concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth certain things on the part of the one praised; second, on the part of the one praising. "Blessed." To bless is nothing other than to speak well. We bless God in one way, and God blesses us in another. We bless God by acknowledging his goodness. Tob. 12: "Bless the God of heaven." Sir. 43: "Blessing the Lord, exalt him as much as you can." But God blesses us by causing goodness in us, because his speaking is his doing. Ps. 148: "He spoke, and they were made." The second he shows when he says, "the Lord." The power of God is considered according to two things. First, according to the work of governance. Wis. 12: "But you, the ruler of power, judge with tranquillity, and with great reverence you dispose of us." And according to the work of creation. And he touches on these two when he says "Lord," to whom it pertains to govern; second when he says "God," for all consider that to be God which is the first principle of being for all things. But the work of governance has ministers; in the work of creation, however, there can be no ministry. Hence the honor that is due to a governor can be communicated to others. Gal. 4: "You received me as an angel of God." And this is dulia. But latria, which is due to the Creator, is owed to no one else. And therefore the Gloss says: "Lord," to whom dulia is due; "God," to whom latria is due. And he says, "of Israel," that is, of those who see God; because even though he governs all things, nevertheless only the faithful obtain the abundant fruit of governance, which is life. And even if all worship God, yet the faithful alone offer the worship of latria to God alone. The third he shows when he says, "from age to age," because your power is not bodily but eternal. Ps. 145: "Your kingdom is a kingdom of all ages." On the part of the one praising he says two things: namely, the confession of the mouth. Rom. 10: "With the heart one believes unto justice, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation." And he does this when he says, "Blessed be God," etc. Likewise, the delight of the will. Phil. 4: "Rejoice in the Lord." And therefore he says, "So be it, so be it"; as if to say: he takes delight in his goods, and he repeats it to signify the continuation of this delight. 1 Chr. 29: "O Lord God, preserve this will." In the Hebrew it has "Amen, Amen." And because "Amen, Amen" is placed at the end of books, some believe that the Book of Psalms is divided into many books, and that one is completed here. But this is not true, because "So be it," or "Amen," is placed here as a continuation of the will, not as the completion of a work.
