Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 9
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 9

[86842] Above, in the preceding Psalm, he gave thanks for benefits bestowed upon the whole human race; but in this Psalm he specifically gives thanks for the benefit bestowed upon himself in the destruction of his enemies. And this is clear from the title according to Jerome, which is as follows: "To the victor, for the death of the son, a canticle of David," etc. And it touches upon the history of 2 Sam. 18 and 19, that when Absalom died, he recovered the kingdom; and for this benefit he composed this Psalm. But in our text the title is more obscure: "Unto the end, for the hidden things of the son, a Psalm of David." The hidden things of the son are the death of the son, namely because through death he is hidden from the eyes of all. According to the mystery, it refers to Christ, who is called the Son par excellence, who is the natural Son of God the Father. Jn. 8: "If the Son shall make you free, you shall be free indeed." Likewise, the Son of David principally promised. Lk. 18: "Have mercy on me, Son of David." "For the hidden things of the son," that is, of Christ, which are hidden. There is a twofold coming of the Son of God. The first was hidden, as regards his divinity and his glory, which lay concealed in the weakness of the flesh. Is. 45: "Truly you are a hidden God." The second will be manifest. Lk. 21: "They shall see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with great power and majesty." Likewise, there is a twofold judgment of Christ. One is hidden; and this is in the governance of the world, according to which he permits the good to suffer persecution from the wicked. Ps. 35: "Your judgments are a great deep." The other is manifest at the end. 1 Cor. 4: "Until the Lord comes, who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness and will make manifest the counsels of hearts." For here it treats of the hidden judgment, according to which the good suffer affliction from the wicked. Job 30: "I expected good things, and behold evils came; I looked for light," etc. And it all comes to the same thing: because he gives thanks for deliverance from enemies. Now this Psalm is divided into two parts. First, he sets forth the thanksgiving; second, the matter of the thanksgiving, at "when they are turned back." He gives thanks in three ways: by heart, by mouth, and by deed. By mouth in two ways: by praising and by proclaiming. By praising, for he says, "I will confess." Now there is a threefold confession: namely, of faith: Rom. 10: "Confession is made unto salvation." Ps. 31: "I said, I will confess," etc. Of sins. Jas. 5: "Confess your sins to one another." Of praise (Tob. 12): "Before all the living, confess to him," etc. And it is about this confession that the text speaks here. "O Lord, I will confess to you," that is, I will give thanks, that is, I will praise you. Ps. 68: "I will praise the name of my God," etc. This is in the heart, because 1 Sam. 16: "Man sees those things which appear, but God looks upon the heart." Against which, Is. 29 and Mk. 7: "This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me." But he says, "with my whole heart," because God is greater than our heart, 1 Jn. 3. And therefore, however much we praise him according to our ability, it is less than he deserves. Deut. 6: "You shall love the Lord your God with your whole heart." Therefore he who does not give his whole heart to God, but wishes to have something else along with him, loses him. Is. 28: "The bed is too narrow, so that one must fall out; and the covering too short, and cannot cover both." Therefore he praises him with his whole heart who accepts nothing against God, but refers everything to him, actually or habitually. Tob. 12: "To reveal and confess the works of God, that is, by announcing them, is honorable." "I will declare," by preaching and announcing to others, because God gives benefits to be shared with others; and this is rightly done by proclaiming them to others. Lk. 8: "Go and declare how great things God has done for you"; and therefore he says, "I will declare all your wonders." But there is a reason that he says "wonders," because the works of God are wonderful. Ps. 76: "You are the God who does wonders." But what does it mean that he says "all"? This seems impossible. Job 5: "Who does great and unsearchable wonders without number." How then does he say "all"? It must be said that "all" means according to kind, or that all the things he narrates are all wonderful; or "all" because the intention of the narrator should not stop at anything, but should proceed as far as it can. Hilary in his book On the Trinity says: "He who piously pursues the infinite, even though he will never arrive, will make progress by advancing." Sir. 43: "Glorifying God as much as you can, he will yet far exceed, and his magnificence is wonderful"; and 42: "Has not God made his saints declare all his wonders?"

[86843] "I will be glad." Here he gives thanks as regards the heart. Some narrate their goods to others and rejoice in themselves, like sinners. Lk. 18, of the Pharisee who said: "I thank you that I am not," etc. But this man rejoices in God always. Sir. 35: "In every gift show a cheerful countenance, and sanctify your tithes with joy." "I will be glad," inwardly in the heart, "and rejoice in you," leaping to outward joy. Hab. 3: "But I will rejoice in the Lord, and I will exult in God my Jesus." "I will sing." Here he gives thanks as regards the deed: for to sing psalms is a manual work, and through this is understood good action, because all our works ought to be directed to the glory of God. Mt. 5: "So let your light shine," etc. Ps. 145: "I will sing to my God as long as I live." But he adds, "to your name, O Most High"; as if to say: God does not benefit from my confessing and singing to you, because your name is most high, but it benefits us. Ps. 34: "My prayer shall return into my own bosom." Job 35: "If you act justly, what will you give him, or what will he receive from your hand?" Job 22: "What does it profit God if you are just, or what do you confer upon him if your way is blameless?"

[86844] "When." Here is set forth the matter of the thanksgiving. First, specifically for himself; second, in general, "let them be turned back." Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he sets forth the deed; second, he praises the authority of the doer, at "the Lord endures forever." Third, he adds the fruit, at "let them hope in you." He sets forth two things: the deed and the justice of the deed. The second, at "because you have done." The deed is the destruction of the enemy, in which he says three things: because if someone is destroyed, first he fails in his purpose; and as to this he says, "when my enemy is turned back," supply "in this, I will confess," that is, I will give thanks to God. Then the enemy is turned back when he fails in what he purposes. Ps. 69: "Let them be turned back and put to shame, who devise evil against me." Second, his strength is weakened; and as to this he says, "they shall be weakened," namely in their power. Jer. 20: "The Lord is with me as a mighty warrior; therefore those who persecute me shall fall and shall be weak." Third, they perish; therefore he says, "they shall perish," either by ceasing from impiety; and this "from your face," that is, from your knowledge or your condemnation. Or, "they shall perish" by your avenging and passing sentence on their wickedness. Or, "they shall perish from your face," because they shall not be able to see you. Is. 26, according to another translation: "Let the wicked one be taken away, lest he see the glory of God."

[86845] Here he sets forth the justice of the deed. First, on his own part, when he says, "because you have done." Sometimes someone has justice, but does not have a judge who will execute it. Sometimes he has a judge, but not a witness or advocate; but this one, having justice, found a judge; and therefore he says, "because you have done my judgment," that is, you have rendered it, "and my cause," that is, you are my witness. Jer. 29: "I am the witness and the judge, says the Lord." For God is both judge and witness: insofar as he is judge, he executes judgment; insofar as he is witness, he defends causes. Second, he sets forth the justice of the deed on the part of the judge; and he speaks of God's authority to judge: "You have sat upon the throne," which is the seat of the judge, that is, you have royal power to destroy evil. Prov. 20: "A king who sits on the throne of judgment scatters all evil with his gaze." Likewise, you have a love of justice; therefore he says, "who judges justice." Jer. 11: "But you, O Lord of hosts, who judge," etc., as if to say: this is proper to you. Ps. 10: "The Lord is just, and he has loved justice." Is. 63: "I who speak justice, and am a defender to save." Or if this is referred to Christ: "because you have done," etc. Christ was judged and had a cause. Job 36: "Your cause has been judged as that of the wicked." But his cause was vindicated, because he attained his glory. "You sit," namely God the Father, "upon the throne," that is, the soul of Christ. Or Christ sits at the right hand of God the Father: adapt the rest as you wish.

[86846] "You have rebuked." Above, the Psalmist showed the judgment done on his part, because in this due judgment was done for him, and on the part of the judge; here he shows the judgment or justice done for him on the part of those who were punished. And first he sets forth the justice itself. Second, he explains it, at "the enemy's weapons have failed." The Lord, in punishing the wicked, does three things to them in order. First, because he does not immediately proceed to the ultimate punishment, but first he reproves; second, if they are not corrected, he punishes; third, he exterminates. As to the first he says, "You have rebuked," through preachers. Is. 58: "Declare to my people their sins, and to the house of Jacob their transgressions." 2 Tim. 4: "Reprove, entreat, rebuke with all patience and teaching." Also through tribulations. Job 33: "He reproves also by pain in bed, and he makes all his bones to wither"; and as to this he says, "the wicked one has perished," either Absalom, or the Devil. Job 4: "Because no one understands, they shall perish forever." "You have rebuked the nations," namely those who were deceived, "and the wicked one," the instigator, "has perished," because the whole multitude rebelled; but it was not destroyed, because it had been seduced. As to the third, he says, "you have blotted out their name," which the wicked strive to perpetuate; but they are not found in perpetuity. Objection: the name of Judas is in memory. It must be said that people do not intend to make their name great in evil, but in good; but the name of Judas remains in evil. Prov. 10: "The name of the wicked shall rot." Jerome says that a certain unknown man, in order to be remembered, burned the temple; and thus the name of the wicked remains in evil.

[86847] "The enemy's weapons." Here he explains how the wicked one perished; and he does two things. First, he assigns the cause of his perishing. Second, the manner, at "their memory has perished." The cause of his perishing is that the very thing from which he wished to make a name for himself has perished. For sometimes people make a name for themselves through military power and wars; hence Gen. 6: "These were the mighty men of old, men of renown." Sometimes by building a city: Sir. 40: "The building of a city establishes a name, and above this a blameless wife is accounted"; just as the name of Romulus through Rome. But the Lord destroyed both. "The swords," that is the weapons, "of the enemy," namely of man, "have failed utterly." Ps. 73: "There he broke the powers." "You have destroyed their cities." Is. 1: "Your land is desolate, your cities are burned with fire." This enemy is especially the Devil: Mt. 13: "An enemy has done this." His sword represents temptations. His cities represent evil counsels, which he uses to pervert the good.

[86848] "Their memory has perished." Here is set forth the manner in which he perished; this is explained in two ways. "It has perished," that is, their memory and their noise perish together. The wicked make noise by shaking kingdoms and destroying cities: Ezek. 31: "All are delivered unto death, to the lowest parts of the earth, in the midst of the children of men, to those who go down into the pit." Or, the wicked -- when some evil man is destroyed, it is not without great tumult, because he must suffer some tribulation, as is evident in Mt. 9, when the Devil went out crying and greatly tearing. Jerome's text has, "Their memory has perished with the wicked," because they did nothing good by which their memory might remain in good: Eccl. 6: "He came in vain and goes into darkness, and his name shall be covered with oblivion." "And the Lord endures forever." Here he sets forth the authority of the doer; and he touches upon six conditions regarding the judgment of God. First, that it is not momentary but eternal. The rule of others is brief in life; therefore the Psalmist says, "The Lord endures forever." Jerome: "The Lord sits as if for judgment." He also says that it is always ready; the judgment of others is not so; hence he says, "He has prepared his throne in judgment," that is, he has it ready. Is. 3: "The Lord stands to judge, he stands to judge the peoples." He also says that it is universal; hence he says, "He shall judge the whole world," and not the Jews alone. Gen. 18: "Far be it from you, Lord, to destroy the just with the wicked." Also, that it is just; hence he says, "in equity, he shall judge the peoples in justice." He says two things: namely equity and justice, because justice involves the execution of things that are just in themselves, which are not just in every case; because rules and measures concern contingent matters, and they cannot be adapted to every particular case, but in some cases they are set aside, just as there are certain rules, measures, and conclusions that in a particular case are not observed on account of something. But the application of these universal principles to particular facts pertains to equity. Jerome says, "He shall judge the peoples in equity," because equity pertains to particular cases, and in a certain way restricts and regulates justice. He also says that it is full of mercy. This is commended from the person to whom mercy is shown, for example, if you do it for the needy: Lk. 14: "When you make a dinner or a supper, do not call your friends, or your kinsmen, or your rich neighbors," etc. Job 30: "I wept for him who was afflicted, and my soul had compassion on the poor." And therefore he says, "The Lord has become a refuge for the poor," namely the oppressed. Is. 1: "Help the oppressed, judge for the orphan, defend the widow." Ps. 81: "Judge for the needy and the orphan, and do justice to the humble and the poor"; and this is true where they have justice. Lev. 19: "You shall not judge unjustly; do not consider the person of the poor, nor honor the countenance of the mighty." Also from the time, because it is at the time when they need it that his mercy is received: Sir. 35: "The mercy of God is beautiful in the time of tribulation, like rain clouds in a time of drought." And therefore he says, "a helper in tribulation"; and he adds "in due times," because in the time of tribulation people turn to God, and then it is time to preach to them. And these things can be explained of Christ. "The Lord endures forever," because "Jesus Christ yesterday and today," Heb. 13. "He has prepared judgment," because he sits on his throne judging, "and he himself shall judge the world in equity." Is. 59: "He put on justice as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation upon his head."

[86849] "And let them hope." Above, the Psalmist set forth the deed for which he gave thanks and the authority of the doer; here he sets forth the fruit of the deed. And first, as regards others; second, as regards himself, at "Have mercy on me, Lord, see," etc. First, he sets forth a threefold fruit in others. The first is knowledge, or confidence in the name of God. The second is spiritual, the joy of those who love him. The third is the proclamation of his name. The second, at "sing psalms." The third, at "announce." He introduces these fruits by way of exhortation; and regarding this he does three things. First, he urges them to hope. Second, he shows to whom it belongs to hope. And third, why. He says therefore, "and let them hope in you." Sir. 2: "You who fear the Lord, hope in him." But whence does this come? Because "they know your name." For hope arises from two things: that he is powerful -- and this is evident, because "Lord" is his name -- and that he is willing, because he is supremely good; hence Lk. 18: "No one is good except God alone." And especially this name Jesus: Mt. 1: "He shall save his people," etc. Phil. 2: "At the name of Jesus every knee shall bend." And why? "Because you do not forsake those who seek you." Wis. 1: "He is found by those who do not test him; and he appears to those who have faith in him," namely those who seek him with good intention; because the wicked do not find him. Jn. 7: "You shall seek me and shall not find me." Likewise, where he is, because he is not among kindred and acquaintances, Lk. 2; Job 28: "Nor is it found in the land of those who live pleasantly." Third, he leads to the second fruit, namely to joy. "Sing psalms to the Lord who dwells in Zion." The Lord is said to dwell in a place not corporally: 2 Sam. 6: David placed the ark in Zion; but according to truth he dwells in the Church. Zion is interpreted as "watchtower," and in the Church we contemplate eternal things. To this Lord, therefore, we ought to sing psalms, that is, to rejoice in heart and mouth and deeds, for benefits given. Third, he leads to the third fruit, "announce." 1 Pet. 4: "Each one, as he has received grace, administering it to one another." And therefore first he induces that they ought to announce. Gregory: "He gathers abundant fruits of his preaching who sends forth the seeds of good work beforehand." "Among the nations," that is, among those living in a pagan manner, that is, among sinners. Is. 21: "Coming to meet the thirsty, bring water." "His endeavors," that is, his care or solicitude for the salvation of the human race. Jer. 29: "I think thoughts of peace." Second, he explains these endeavors, at "because he who requires," etc. That which someone does with zeal and diligence, he does not forget to do. But God is zealous for the salvation of men, and therefore he does not forget. Two things cause forgetfulness: namely death. Ps. 30: "I am given to oblivion like one dead from the heart"; likewise poverty. Prov. 19: "The brothers of a poor man hate him." Rev. 6: "Why do you not avenge?" etc. But does God not forget the dead? "Because he who requires their blood," that is, of those who seek you, even if it happens that they are killed; and this by judging. Or, he will require the blood of the saints, in the resurrection, by restoring it. Wis. 5: "Behold how they are numbered," etc. He is said to "remember," not that he had forgotten, but because he seems to have forgotten on account of the delay. Also, he does not forget the poor and the little ones; hence, "he has not forgotten the cry of the poor." Ps. 33: "This poor man cried out," whether in dangers or in prayer. Jas. 5: "Their cry," etc. Ps. 21: "He has not despised nor rejected the prayer of the poor." Ex. 3: "I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and I have come down to deliver them."

[86850] "Have mercy." Here he sets forth the fruit as regards himself. And first, he commemorates the benefit. Second, he sets forth the fruit, at "that I may announce," etc. The benefit is twofold: one future, the other already received. "Who exalts," etc. First, he does two things. First, he sets forth the mercy. Second, the motive for mercy. The future benefit is mercy. "Have mercy on me." Ps. 32: "The earth is full of the mercy of the Lord." The motive for mercy is the consideration of God. "See," that is, consider, "my humiliation." This humility does not signify the virtue, as in "if I did not think humbly," but rather abasement. Hence Jerome has "my affliction from my enemies," because they afflict me. Or otherwise: "See my humility," because he gives grace to the humble, Jas. 4. But this can be considered from the consideration of enemies, who are proud and wicked. Consequently, he acknowledges the benefit already received: "Who exalts me," etc.; as if to say: you have rescued me from so great a danger that nothing remained but for me to die. Jer. 9: "Death has come up through our windows; it has entered our houses to destroy the little ones outside." Spiritually, however, the gates of death are the heretics: Mt. 16: "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it." And the senses of man: Jer. 9: "Death has entered through the windows." Hatred of the word of God: Ps. 106: "Their soul abhorred all food, and they drew near even to the gates of death." Temptations and vices: Wis. 16: "You lead to the gates of death, and bring back again." Therefore whoever is freed from these, let him say, "You exalt me," that is, "You have freed me from the gates of death."

[86851] Consequently, when he says "that," he sets forth the fruit, but in reverse order. First, of proclamation. Second, of exultation, at "I will exult." Third, of recognition, at "it will be known." I say that you have had mercy and I ask that you have mercy; and this "that I may announce" your praises. In ancient times, judgments were held at the gates; and therefore he says, "in the gates of the daughter of Zion," that is, of Jerusalem, because it was subject to the citadel which was called Zion; as if to say: in the multitude of the people of Jerusalem, "I will announce all your praises" -- not absolutely all, but of every kind of praise. Likewise, the gates of the daughter of Zion are called the doctors of the Church: Is. 54: "I will make your gates of carved stones; all your children taught by the Lord." Also of justice: "This is the gate of the Lord, the just shall enter into it," as said in Ps. 117. Also good thoughts: Ps. 147: "The bars of your gates." In these gates, therefore, "I will announce your praises."

[86852] "I will exult." Having set forth one fruit, namely the preaching of divine praise, here he sets forth the second, namely spiritual joy from God. And first, he sets forth his own exultation. Second, the occasion of exulting, at "the nations are stuck fast." He says therefore: "I will announce all your praises." But these would be barren if they were in the mouth but there were no joy in the heart: Ps. 146: "Let praise be joyful to our God"; and therefore he adds, "I will exult in your salvation." Not in the world or in the flesh, but in your saving act by which you exalt me. Or in Christ the Savior: Hab. 3: "I will exult in God my Jesus." 1 Sam. 2: "I have rejoiced in your salvation." The occasion of exultation is the destruction of enemies who persecute the saints. And they persecute the saints in two ways. First, by violence. Second, by fraud. He says therefore, regarding the first, "the nations are stuck fast" -- from the fact that they prepared slaughter for others, they themselves were slain; and therefore he said "stuck fast," or, according to Jerome, "submerged": because that which is stuck fast is pressed down with violence. And those who seemed to be slaying others with violence were themselves violently oppressed. Is. 59: "Their paths are made crooked for them." Ps. 36: "Their sword shall enter," etc. Or spiritually, one is plunged into destruction when he commits sin; because from this he enters eternal punishment and is condemned; and they are stuck fast in these works through habit: Job 18: "He has thrust his foot into the net, and he walks in its mesh." Regarding the second, he says, "in this snare." Those who lie in wait for birds and animals set snares; so do those who proceed insidiously: Ps. 56: "They have prepared a snare for my feet." And he says "they hid it," because literally fowlers hide their snares; so fraudulently, through words of peace that they give, they prepare the poison of seduction: Ps. 139: "In this way in which I walked, the proud have hidden a snare for me." The third fruit is the recognition of divine majesty. "Their foot is caught," that is, their evil desire: Hos. 13: "The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up, his sin is hidden," referring to those who are inclined only to evil. And they hide the snare, but in vain, because "the Lord will be known." And through what? Because "in his works." Sometimes people in prosperity do not know God, as Pharaoh, but in adversity: Ps. 82: "Fill their faces with shame"; and therefore he says, "executing judgments." But what the judgments of God are, he adds: "in his works." It is proper to divine wisdom that it disposes all things sweetly, Wis. 8. And this it does by giving things the ability to tend toward their proper ends through their proper forms: thus, through the very things by which sinners plan to offend, they fall into punishment. Job 5: "Who catches the wise in their own craftiness." And therefore he says, "In the works of his own hands the sinner is caught." Prov. 5: "His own iniquities catch the wicked, and he is bound by the cords of his own sins." Job 18: "His own counsel has cast him down headlong." Likewise, "the Lord will be known," here by the saints. Even escaping the snare: Prov. 1: "In vain is the net cast before the eyes of those who have wings." The Gloss says there: "He easily escapes the snares on earth who always has his eyes on heaven." Jerome: "Each one carries with himself the ropes, chains, and torments from which he suffers evils; and by the hidden judgment of God, sinners are caught in the snares they hide, and the just escape."

[86853] "Let them be turned back." Above, the Psalmist treated the judgment of God with regard to his own adversaries; here he pursues it with regard to the whole human race, and with regard to the evils done everywhere by sinners; and regarding this he does two things. First, by way of prayer, he foretells the judgment of God against the wicked. Second, he sets forth the progress of the wicked, at "Why, O Lord?" etc. Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he foretells the punishment of sinners; second, he calls upon the divine judgment that punishes, at "Arise, O Lord." Regarding the first, he does three things. First, he foretells the punishment to be desired. Second, he sets forth the cause of the punishment on the part of sinners, at "all the nations." Third, on the part of the just, "because not unto the end." He says therefore, "Let the sinners be turned back." This petition can be understood in two ways. In one way, of the punishment of the wicked in the present through death. In another way, in the future through eternal punishment. And he says, "Let the sinners be turned back," that is, let them be punished. But should this be requested? It must be said that the prophet says this by way of foretelling and not of petition, or by conforming himself to the divine will: Ps. 62: "They shall go into the lower parts of the earth." Is. 14: "But you shall be brought down to hell," that is, the depth of the pit. Or by hell is understood the obstinacy of the mind in sin, etc. Even while living, a sinner is turned back into hell when he relies upon obstinacy: Rom. 1: "God gave them up to a reprobate mind"; as if to say: in this life let them be cast down. Therefore, the punishment is conversion into hell, as has been said. The cause of the punishment is forgetfulness of God: for he who departs from one end disposes himself to tend toward the other. The two ends of man are the enjoyment of God and Gehenna; and this is what he says, "Let them be turned back," etc., namely those sinners who forget the commandments and benefits of God. Ps. 77: "They forgot his benefits and his wonders which he showed them." Deut. 32: "You have forsaken the God who begot you, and forgotten the Lord your creator."

On the part of the just, there is another cause which demands vengeance upon sinners. Now among the just there are two things which demand vengeance: namely temporal abasement and spiritual virtue. As to the first, he says: "because the poor man shall not be forgotten unto the end." Cheap things are held in contempt, words are given to oblivion; but the just are not so given to oblivion before God. Jas. 2: "God has chosen the poor, rich in faith, heirs of the kingdom which God has promised to those who love him." Mt. 5: "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." Therefore, although here they seem to be given to oblivion, this is nevertheless not "unto the end," that is, not finally. Is. 54: "For a brief moment I forsook you, and with great mercies I will gather you." And there follows: "And with everlasting mercy I have had compassion on you." For when he remembers, then he will punish those who oppress. Ps. 76: "God will not forget to have mercy, nor will he shut up his mercies in his wrath." As to the second, "the patience of the poor," etc. Or "the expectation" according to Jerome. For since they endure oppression and poverty here patiently, through patience they merit vengeance; nor shall their expectation perish unto the end, because they shall obtain the good they await. Otherwise, "unto the end," which is eternal life. But is patience in the heavenly homeland? It must be said that it is not according to its essence, but according to its fruit; it is otherwise with charity and justice, which will exist also according to their essence. Consequently, when he says, "Arise," he foretells the divine judgment; and regarding this he does three things. First, he rouses the judge. Second, he implores judgment. Third, he shows the fruits of judgment. He says that he has not forgotten the poor unto the end; hence he, as one of the poor, says, "I ask that you not delay until the end to reward; but arise." And regarding this he does three things. First, he repudiates wicked or human judgment. For let not man, humanly and without reason oppressing, "be strengthened," that is, let him not be able to do what he wishes. Prov. 29: "When the wicked take power, the people groan." Second, he calls for the judgment of another: "Let the nations be judged," not according to human will, but "in your sight," that is, by your judgment, as if saying, I appeal to you. Acts 25: "I stand before the tribunal of Caesar; there I ought to be judged." Ps. 23: "Judge me, O Lord, because," etc. Third, he asks for a helper: "Appoint a lawgiver," namely your Son. Is. 33: "The Lord is our lawgiver." Or otherwise, "appoint a lawgiver," that is, a punisher according to your law; for punishment is inflicted according to the law. Jerome has: "Put fear upon them"; another translation: "Send them bitterness." The Gloss: "Let not man be strengthened," that is, the Antichrist; "let them be judged," that is, punished. The fruit of judgment is that they recognize themselves to be men: "Let the nations know that they are men," fragile, sinners, and mortal. Is. 28: "Vexation gives understanding." Thus Alexander, when he was struck, recognized that he was not the son of Jupiter but mortal, as he himself said to his soldiers.

[86854] Here he sets forth the progress of the wicked. And first, he sets forth the cause of their wickedness. Second, he describes their wickedness, at "whose mouth is full of cursing," etc. Third, against it he implores divine assistance, at "Arise, O Lord God." The cause of wickedness is twofold: namely permissive and inductive. The second, at "because the sinner is praised." Regarding the first, he does three things. First, he sets forth the divine dissimulation, which seems to be the cause of evildoing for the wicked. Eccl. 8: "Because sentence is not speedily pronounced against the evil, the children of men commit evil without fear"; hence he adds: "Why, O Lord, have you withdrawn far off?" Insofar as you do not punish those who afflict us, and in this you seem to despise us, "in due times," that is, in the time when you ought to bring help. Or, "in due times," that is, you do this opportunely, because the saints thereby advance toward the merit of eternal life. Second, he sets forth the effect of the dissimulation, "while the wicked one is proud." And he sets forth a double effect among the wicked. Pride, because they are not immediately punished by God; and therefore he says: "The wicked one is proud." In his powers, "the poor man is set on fire," that is, afflicted. Or, he is set on fire spiritually from the consideration of the pride of the wicked and their sins: Ps. 68: "The zeal of your house has consumed me." The third effect is that they are caught in the counsels they devise, because their counsels will ultimately destroy them. Prov. 5: "His own iniquities catch the wicked, and he is bound by the cords of his own sins."

[86855] "Because." Here are set forth three causes leading to sin. The first is flattery. The second, contempt of God, at "he said in his heart." The third, presumption, at "God is not." Regarding the first, he does three things. First, he sets forth the flattery. Second, the effect. Third, the divine clemency. Now sinners are praised, according to the Gloss, for a twofold sin: namely, of carnal concupiscence as regards themselves, and of injustice as regards neighbor; therefore they are proud. But according to Jerome, "because he is praised," and therefore "he has provoked," "in his desires," as regards concupiscence, "and the unjust one," as regards injustice against neighbor. Jerome's text has "a covetous man." Another text, "a robber." Is. 5: "Woe to those who call good evil," because it is so. "The sinner has provoked the Lord," that is, has provoked him to wrath. Jerome has all this under one verse; and another verse begins at "the sinner, according to the multitude," etc. Now it can be read, "according to the multitude of his wrath, he will not seek." Either because he punishes less than what is deserved, or because in his great wrath he does not punish now, so as to punish more severely in the future. Or, "of his wrath," namely of the sinner, "God will not seek" the sin.

[86856] "God is not." Above, the Psalmist set forth certain causes of the malice of the wicked, of which one was permissive, because God withdrew far off; the second was inductive, namely the flattering tongue. Here are set forth other motivating causes, namely intrinsic ones, which are two: namely contempt of God and personal presumption. The second, at "he said in his heart." Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth that the wicked man does not think about God. Second, that he does not fear God's judgments, at "they are removed." Regarding the first, he does two things. Because first he sets forth the turning away from God, or his contempt. Second, the effect of the turning away, at "they are defiled." He says therefore, "God is not in his sight." Jerome has, "in his thoughts," because he thinks nothing about God; and it is connected thus: the sinner will not seek God, because God is not in his sight, that is, in his intention or thought. Job 21: "They said to God: Depart from us; we do not desire the knowledge of your ways." The effect is that "his ways are defiled," that is, they are sordid at all times. The ways of the sinner are his thoughts or his wills: Wis. 1: "Wisdom will not enter a soul that devises evil, nor will it dwell in a body subject to sins." And they are said to be defiled through sin, or in the likeness of the sins of the preceding time. This can be said allegorically of the Antichrist, morally of sinners: because by the very fact that God is not in their intention, they turn themselves to temporal things, by which the soul is defiled insofar as it mingles with things that are lower than the soul. But the soul mingled with God, who is better than the soul, is not defiled but glorified. Lam. 1: "Her filthiness is on her feet, and she did not remember her end." Ps. 34: "Their ways are darkness and slipperiness." Jer. 2: "They have forsaken me, the fountain of living water, and have dug for themselves broken cisterns that cannot hold water." Jerome has, "His ways bring forth," because sinners propose to do various things: Lk. 12: "My soul, you have many goods laid up for many years; eat and make merry." And the Lord said, "Fool, this night," etc. Ps. 7: "He conceived sorrow and brought forth iniquity." He who clings to temporal things is not fixed in one, because it does not suffice; and because of this, he thinks of various things.

[86857] "They are removed." Here he shows how they contemn divine judgment. And first, he sets forth the cause. Second, he shows the effect, at "all his enemies." "Your judgments," that is, your benefits, "are removed from his face," that is, from his mind and memory; and so he will not fear because he does not think about them. Prov. 28: "Evil men do not think about judgments; but those who seek the Lord observe all things." Dan. 13: "They turned away their eyes so as not to see heaven." But Jerome's text must be read with some strain: "They will despise all his enemies," as if he does not believe in the judgments of God. "And he shall have dominion," supply, "in his heart." Or sometimes, by God's permission, the wicked have dominion over their enemies. And this is the cause why the divine judgments are not recognized: Hab. 1: "He himself triumphed over kings." Ibid.: "The wicked prevails against the just; therefore perverted judgment goes forth." Another cause is presumption about oneself; and they presume two things. Stability; and this is what he says: "He said in his heart, I shall not be moved from generation," that is, my dominion shall not extend from one nation to another, and I will not inflict evils on many; "I shall not be moved," that is, I shall not lose my prosperity. Is. 47: "You have laid your yoke very heavy; you said, I shall be a lady forever." Jerome has, "and he said, forever I shall be, from generation without evil," that is, I shall never suffer evil. Rev. 18: "I sit a queen and am not a widow." And Lk. 3, in the Gloss, explaining one passage: the sinner, wishing to perpetuate his name, said, "He will not go by celebrity and fame." "Without evil," that is, I will not do evil. Or, "I shall not be moved," that is, I shall not attain to the possession of houses, "without evil" of violence and injustice. And so the Antichrist will act, according to the Gloss. Or, "I the Antichrist shall not be moved," that is, disturbed, "from generation to generation without evil," that is, I shall be according to what is lawful.

[86858] "Whose mouth." Here he sets forth the progress of malice. And first, in the heart, about which he has already spoken. Second, of the mouth. Third, of deed, "he sits in ambush," etc. Regarding the first, he sets forth two things. The sin of the mouth, which is committed in three ways. Sometimes by cursing God or neighbor, which is to break forth into blasphemy: Is. 1: "They have blasphemed the Holy One of Israel." Sometimes they curse partially, when they are held back by fear. Sometimes by breaking forth into insults, and this is "a mouth full of bitterness," according to the Gloss, "of bitter words and threats." Eph. 4: "Let all bitterness, indignation, blasphemy, and clamor be taken away from you." Sometimes by deceiving, and this is "full of deceit." 1 Cor. 6: "Neither revilers nor robbers shall possess the kingdom of God." Heb. 12: "Lest any root of bitterness springing up should hinder, and by it many be defiled." Second, he sets forth the root in the heart. "Under his tongue," that is, in the interior of the heart, "toil lies hidden." The Gloss: that is, iniquity. For he thinks to accomplish the iniquity in which he labors. Jer. 9: "They have labored to act unjustly." Job 20: "When it is sweet in his mouth," etc. Or, "toil," because he plans to inflict toil and sorrow on others; "sorrow," that is, the ruin following from toil. Is. 59: "The lips of a man have spoken lies, and your tongue makes lies and iniquity."

[86859] Here he shows the progress of the wicked as regards the body; and regarding this he does two things. First, he sets forth their progress. Second, the end of the progress, "in the snare." Regarding the first, he does three things. First, he sets forth with whom he lies in ambush, at "with the rich." Second, against whom: "to kill the innocent." Third, how he lies in ambush, "he lies in ambush in secret." He says therefore: The wicked, not content with speech, labor to accomplish their deeds; hence "he sits in ambush," thinking how to harm others. "In secret places," on account of simulation: Sir. 11: "Many are the snares of the deceitful." "With the rich," that is, with counselors: Sir. 13: "The hunting of a lion is the wild donkey in the desert; so are the poor the pasture of the rich." Jerome has, "near the vestibule," that is, his chamber. Against whom does he show this? Certainly against the innocent; hence, "to kill the innocent," corporally or spiritually. Ex. 23: "The innocent and the just you shall not put to death." And against the poor; hence, "his eyes are upon the poor." Is. 3: "Why do you crush my people, and grind the faces of the poor?" The Gloss: the Antichrist will take counsel with the rich against the poor. Jerome has, "his eyes are upon the strong," because the poor are not strong in temporal things, but in spiritual things. Job 16: "My enemy has looked upon me with terrible eyes."

[86860] "He lies in ambush." Here the manner of ambush is set forth. And first, he sets forth the comparison: "like a lion in his den," namely, so wicked rulers oppress the poor. Prov. 28: "A roaring lion and a hungry bear: a wicked ruler over a poor people." Second, the manner of ambush itself, "he lies in ambush to seize." Prov. 12: "The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood." Or, "he lies in ambush to seize the poor man," that is, the goods of the poor through violence and fraud. He adds the manner of the robbery: "while he draws him in," enticing by promises, or by violence, or by fraud. Prov. 7: "With the flattery of her lips she draws him into the net."

[86861] "In his snare." Here two things are set forth. And first, to what their effort leads. Second, the cause, at "he said." For the effort of the sinner, according to his intention, leads to the prostration of the poor; hence, "in his snare." But according to God's ordering, it leads first to the emptying of his power; hence, "he bowed himself down." For it happens that warlike men sometimes at first, but afterward turn to pleasures, and thus, having become effeminate, are expelled. And therefore the Philosopher says that those preserving dominion should not raise their sons in luxury: Sir. 47: "You bowed your thighs to women." Ps. 13: "All have turned aside." Second, to total fall: Prov. 16: "Before destruction comes exaltation," because exaltation is a sign of ruin. The Gloss explains this of the Antichrist. Jerome has it differently: "While he draws him into his snare, and having broken him, he subjects him and rushes upon him mightily with his forces." A lion first prostrates the captured animal. Second, he subjects it. Third, he falls upon it. For the cause is the false security which he conceives. First, about the past: "because God has forgotten," namely the sinner. Against this, Sir. 16: "Do not say in your heart, I shall be hidden from God, and who will remember me from on high?" Likewise, ibid. 23: "The Most High will not remember my offenses, and he does not understand that his eye sees all things." Second, about the future. "He has turned away his face so as not to see unto the end." Job 37: "Clouds are his hiding place," etc.

[86862] "Arise." Above, the Psalmist diligently pursued the order of human iniquity; here, as if driven by zeal and crying out, he implores assistance against this wickedness. And first, he implores assistance. Second, he introduces prayers and their being heard. Third, he foretells his being heard. The second, at "do not forget." The third, at "break." And he asks for one thing and presupposes another: he asks that God arise, "Arise." The Lord seems to sleep when he allows the good to be afflicted; he arises when he delivers. Is. 52: "Arise, arise, put on your strength, O Zion." He presupposes divine power: "Let your hand be exalted," in power; and he speaks in the likeness of an angry striker, when he wishes to strike the enemy and raises his hand. Sir. 36: "Lift up your hand over the foreign nations, that they may see your power." Is. 26: "Let your hand be exalted so that they may not see. Let them see," etc. "And let them be confounded who are zealous against the people." He sets forth the reasons: "do not forget." And note that because this Psalm was made against sinners persecuting the just, he always sets forth on one side the malice of sinners and on the other the affliction of the just. He therefore first sets forth the reasons. Second, he shows them to be effective, "see, because," etc. And he sets forth two reasons: one on the part of the just, and another on the part of the wicked, at "why has the wicked one provoked?" He says therefore, "and let it be exalted," because otherwise what the wicked say will seem true, that you have forgotten the poor. Is. 49: "Can a woman forget her infant, so as not to have pity on the son of her womb? And if she should forget, yet I will not forget you." Ps. 136: "Let my tongue cleave to my palate, if I do not remember you." Another reason on the part of the wicked, who sin more grievously if they are not punished: Eccl. 8: "And because sentence is not speedily pronounced against the evil," etc. And therefore he says, "why?"; as if to say: because of this, the wicked provoke God by sinning, because they do not believe they will be called to account through punishments. Job 22: "He walks about the poles of heaven, and does not consider our matters"; and "you say, what does God know; and as if through darkness he judges." Ezek. 9: "God has forsaken the earth."

[86863] "You see." He strengthens the reasons. First, the second, saying, "you alone see the toil" which the wicked inflict upon the good, "so that you may deliver them," that is, in the future, "into your hands," that is, of your justice, who now hold them in the hands of your power, and now do not exercise justice. But sinners do not know this, because the reason of your providence is unknown to them. Job 11: "Seeing iniquity, does he not consider it?" Likewise, ibid. 12: "With him is strength and wisdom; he knows the deceiver and the one who is deceived; and he leads counselors to a foolish end, and judges to stupor." Rom. 11: "His judgments are incomprehensible." Or, "into your hands," that is, of your Son. Jn. 13: "Knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands." Or, according to Augustine, this verse is said on the part of the wicked, who said in their heart, "He will not seek," namely God. And again they said, "because you see the toil." A prelate sometimes sees the fault of a subject and does not punish, fearing the toil or even the penalty from the one punished; and therefore, the wicked one says: O God, you do not punish, because toil and sorrow do not follow upon you. But the first reading is better.

[86864] "To you." Here he confirms the first reason; as if to say: you should not forget, because "to you the poor man is left," hence his care belongs to you. Is. 52: "Rejoice and be glad together, O desolate Jerusalem, for the Lord has comforted his people." All who have nothing in the world except God alone, their help belongs to God alone. 2 Chron. 20: "When we do not know what we should do, we have only this recourse: to direct our eyes to God." But he speaks pointedly: for people in this world sometimes defend themselves through riches. Ps. 48: "Those who trust in their own strength and glory in the multitude of their riches." Sometimes through relatives and friends and defenders; but those who do not have these are left to God, and therefore he says, "to you the poor man is left." Job 36: "He will deliver the poor man from his distress." Likewise, ibid. 30: "I wept for him who was afflicted," etc. Lam. 5: "We have become orphans without a father." Ps. 87: "Like a man without help." And if this is so for one who is poor by necessity, how much more for one who is poor in spirit; and this as to the first. As to the second, he says, "you will be a helper to the orphan," who has no defender. Ps. 67: "Father of orphans and judge of widows." Likewise, 26: "Because my father and my mother have left me, but the Lord has taken me up."

[86865] "Break." Here he announces his being heard. And first, as to sinners. Second, as to the poor, at "the desire of the poor," etc. Regarding the first, he does two things. First, he announces the cessation of the power of the wicked by which they inflicted evils. Second, the cessation of their evils themselves. As to the first, he says, "break the arm of the sinner," who sins against God. Is. 14: "The Lord has broken the arm, or the staff, of the wicked, the rod of those who struck the peoples," etc. "And of the malicious one," who sins against his neighbor. Ps. 36: "The arms of sinners shall be broken," etc. Job 38: "The light shall be taken from the wicked, and their arm shall be broken." But sometimes it happens that a tyrant does wickedness, and although he himself is consumed, the wickedness endures. But not so: because "his sin shall be sought and shall not be found," that is, the act of that sin passes, but not the guilt; and the punishment of the sinner remains. Or, "his sin shall be sought and shall not be found" in the world. 1 Macc. 2: "Today he is exalted, and tomorrow he shall not be found." Sometimes God permits some to sin on account of the good he draws from it, such as the passion or patience of martyrs from the wrath of a tyrant; and therefore there is a place here for the wicked. But then it will not be found that sin has any utility. But how shall this be? Because the kingdom of God cannot be taken away; therefore by him the wicked shall be crushed. "The Lord shall reign forever," which comprehends all ages, "and unto ages of ages," that is, eternally. Or, "unto the age" which succeeds the present age. Dan. 7: "His power is an everlasting power which shall not be taken away, and his kingdom which shall not be corrupted"; "and you wicked ones shall perish from this land of the living." Ps. 1: "Like dust which the wind drives from the face of the earth." Ps. 36: "I saw the wicked exalted and lifted up like the cedars of Lebanon; and I passed by, and behold he was not; and I sought him and his place was not found."

[86866] "The desire." Here he foretells being heard on the part of the poor; and he sets forth three things. First, the hearing, at "the desire." Second, in what he was heard, at "to judge." Third, with what fruit, at "that man may no longer presume." Regarding the first, he shows that the poor are heard efficaciously, because God gives them what they desire. Prov. 10: "The desire of the just shall be granted." Sometimes indeed they are heard in their particular desires, as the saints are heard in those things they most desire. He also heard speedily their preparation: Is. 65: "Before they call, I will hear." Ps. 90: "He cried to me, and I will hear him." He heard in this, that "he judges for the orphan," because he is an orphan. Is. 11: "He shall judge the poor in justice and shall reprove in equity for the meek of the earth," namely the humble. The humble is he who does not rely on his own strength. Joel 2: "The judgment of the poor," etc. Job 36: "He gives judgment to the poor." And with what fruit? "That man may no longer presume," namely the one who has been terrified. This is not good, because it is pride. Ps. 130: "If I did not think humbly, but exalted my soul, like a weaned child," etc. Likewise, 11: "We will make our tongue great."