Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 32
============================================================

Commentary on Psalm 32

[87088] The title is not new. It is: "To the end, a Psalm of David." In the preceding Psalm the Psalmist treated of his own justification; but in this one he treats of the dignity of the just. And concerning this he does two things. First, he exhorts the just to spiritual praise. Second, he expresses their dignity, at "Blessed is the nation." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he exhorts to spiritual joy and praise. Second, he assigns the reason for the joy and praise, at "Because his word is right." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he exhorts to joy and praise. Second, he explains their manner, at "Give praise to the Lord," and so on. Concerning the first he does two things. First, he sets forth the exhortation. Second, he assigns its reason: "Praise befits the upright." For he had said, "I said, I will confess ... and you forgave ... and for this everyone who is holy shall pray," and so on. Therefore, "O you just, because you have been justified, exult in the Lord," not in the world; otherwise you are not just, for he is not just who does not rejoice in justice. God himself is just, and he himself is justice: Ps. 10: "The Lord is just," and so on. And therefore, "You just, exult in the Lord": Hab. 3: "But I will rejoice in the Lord, and I will exult in God my Jesus." But why does he say, "Exult, you just, in the Lord," and not, "Exult, all, in the Lord"? The reason is: because "praise befits the upright," namely, the praise of God. It must be seen, therefore, whether they are upright, and how praise befits them. A thing is not called right except insofar as it conforms to a rule and measure. Now the measure and rule of the human will is justice and the divine will. Those therefore who do not have right affection cannot properly praise God, because they do not wish to conform their will to the divine will, but rather want the divine will to conform to theirs. And therefore God does many things that they do not approve. But those who adapt themselves to God's will rejoice in prosperity and adversity; and therefore he says "praise," because they praise on account of all things, not only in some. Likewise, unanimously. Sir. 15: "Praise is not comely in the mouth of a sinner": Is. 4: "Exultation for those who were saved from Israel."

[87089] Then when he says, "Give praise to the Lord," he sets forth the manner of praise and joy. Now it should be known that in the praise of God what is principally intended is that the affection of man should tend toward God and be directed to him. Likewise, the harmonies of music change a man's affection. Hence Pythagoras, seeing that a youth was going mad at the sound of the Phrygian mode, had the mode changed; and so he tempered the spirit of the frenzied youth to a most peaceful state of mind, as Boethius says in the preface to his work on music. Hence it is that it was devised that in every form of worship certain musical harmonies should be employed, so that the spirit of man might be stirred toward God. These harmonies have customarily been employed in two ways: sometimes with musical instruments, and sometimes with songs. And therefore first he shows the first mode, because "on the harp." Second, the second, at "Sing to him." For the affection of man is directed through instruments and musical harmonies in three ways: because sometimes it is established in a certain rectitude and firmness of soul; sometimes it is carried to sublimity; and sometimes to sweetness and joy. And for this purpose, as the Philosopher holds in Politics VIII, chapter 7, three kinds of song have been instituted. For the first, there is the Dorian song, which belongs to the first and second tones, as some hold. For the second, there is the Phrygian song, which belongs to the third tone. For the third, there is the Hypolydian song, which belongs to the fifth and sixth tones. The others were invented later. And so it is with instruments, because certain instruments produce the first effect, such as the pipe and the trumpet; certain produce the second, such as the organ; and certain the third, such as the psaltery and the harp: Ps. 80: "The pleasant psaltery with the harp." But because the Psalmist here intends to lead to exultation, he makes mention only of these two, namely the psaltery and the harp. But truly, because all these things happened to them in figure, 1 Cor. 10, they used not only these instruments for this purpose, but also in figure. The harp has its sound from below and signifies the praise that arises from things below, that is, earthly things. The psaltery, however, has its sound from above and signifies the praise that concerns heavenly goods. He says "of ten strings" because by them are signified the ten precepts of the Decalogue, in which the whole of spiritual teaching consists.

[87090] Then when he says, "Sing," he treats of the song of the human voice. Now it should be known, according to the letter, that there is a twofold modulation: one is through simple song, and another through harmonizing. He touches on the first when he says, "A new song." The second, at "With a shout." According to the spiritual understanding, a man ought to exult in two things: namely, in the goods of grace received and in the goods of glory expected. Through the first goods we are renewed. Eph. 4: "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind": Rom. 6: "Let us walk in newness of life." He therefore sings a new song who exults in God because of the renewal of grace: Rev. 14: "The saints were singing a new song." He truly sings well with a shout who sings of the goods of glory, and the song which a man conceives in the heart, he expresses in words. Or, "with jubilation," or "in a shout of joy," according to Jerome. Jubilation is an ineffable joy that cannot be expressed in words, but by voice one gives to understand an immense breadth of joys. Those things that cannot be expressed are the goods of glory: 1 Cor. 2: "Eye has not seen, nor ear heard," and so on. And therefore he says, "Sing well to him with jubilation," because they cannot be expressed in song. But you may ask: in the Old Testament there were musical instruments and vocal songs. Why then did the Church set aside the former but adopt the latter? A twofold reason is assigned mystically: because they were figurative. The second reason is that God is praised with the mind and the voice, not with instruments. Another reason is found in the words of the Philosopher, who says that it is contrary to wisdom for men to be trained on lyres and musical instruments, because these occupy the mind in their own operation; rather, music should be simple, so that those dedicated to divine praises may be drawn away from corporeal things.

[87091] Second, when he says, "Because," he assigns the reason for joy and praise. The reason for praise and joy is twofold. One is on the part of God, in whom we are to exult. The second is on the part of his effects, at "By the word of the Lord." Concerning the first he does three things. First, he sets forth the reasons on God's part. And first, because "the word of the Lord is right," that is, his instruction: Ps. 118: "Your word is a lamp to my feet," and so on. Or, his very promise: Prov. 8: "All my words are just," and so on, "they are right to those who understand." Second, because "all his works are done in faithfulness," that is, they are faithful: Ps. 144: "The Lord is faithful in all his words and holy in all his works." Now there is great joy when a faithful man is found: Prov. 20: "A faithful man, who shall find?" Or, he says "in faith" because the works of God are good merits. But these are not meritorious unless they are done in faith, because without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. 11. Or, "his word is right" and "his works." But for whom? "In faith," that is, in the faithful; for in the unfaithful the works and right words of God do not appear. Third, because he loves; and concerning this he does two things. First, he shows the affection of God when he says, "The Lord loves." Second, he manifests it through a sign, at "The earth is full of the mercy of the Lord." Among all the things that cause joy in the Lord, there are two: namely, mercy and justice: Prov. 20: "Mercy and truth preserve the king." For through justice subjects are defended. Take away justice, and no one will be secure and happy. Likewise, without mercy all fear and do not love. He gives us to understand this about God when he says, "The Lord loves mercy and judgment." He loves these in himself, because they are in his works: Ps. 24: "All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth." Likewise, he loves these in each one: Mic. 6: "I will show you, O man, what is good and what the Lord requires of you," and so on. And therefore he says, "Exult," because God truly loves mercy, for "the earth is full of the mercy of the Lord." Behold, he manifests it through a sign. For all the fullness of the earth proceeds from the mercy of God, because the earth is full not of temporal goods but of spiritual goods, and especially after the coming of Christ. Acts 2: "They were all filled with the Holy Spirit," and so on. All these things are from the mercy of God: Rom. 9: "It is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who shows mercy." He says "the earth," and so on, not heaven, because in heaven there is no misery, and therefore it does not need mercy; but the earth, where man is filled with many miseries, needs the fullness of mercy.

[87092] Then when he says, "By the word," the cause of joy is set forth on the part of the divine effects. Moses at the beginning of the creation of things makes mention of three: heaven, water, and earth: Gen. 1: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth"; and further: "The Spirit of the Lord moved over the waters." According to this, therefore, the Psalmist sets forth, first, the effect of God in the heavens. Second, in the waters, at "Gathering together." Third, on the earth, at "Let all the earth fear the Lord." He says therefore, "By the word of the Lord the heavens were established." According to the Gloss, this is expounded both literally and mystically. And in both senses these words are treated, which are on the part of God: namely, Lord, Word, and Spirit of his mouth. Lord is a name of power, and power is appropriated to the Father. The Word is the conception of the mind, hence it is also called begotten wisdom. And the Word is the Son. His Spirit is the Holy Spirit. He is called the Spirit of his mouth because "mouth" is appropriated to the Word; hence it is the same as saying "the Spirit of the Word," because he is the Spirit of the Son and of truth. And although the works of the Trinity are undivided in the divine: Jn. 5: "Whatever the Father does, these the Son also does in like manner"; yet here he speaks according to appropriation. In heaven there are two wondrous things: namely, its perpetuity, because it is incorruptible, and its power, by which the entire lower world is changed -- through heat in summer and through cold in winter. The perpetuity of the heavens comes from the nature of their form; for the forms of the elements are particular and do not fill the entire potentiality of matter; hence their matter remains in potentiality to another form. But the form of heaven has a certain totality and fills the entire potentiality of matter. But the form of an artifact proceeds from the form of the artificer. The form conceived in the heart of the Father is the Word. Therefore, the formation of every thing is attributed to the Word; hence he says, "By the word of the Lord the heavens were established." But the power of the heavens is in moving. Every subsequent motion is derived from a prior one as from a cause. The first motion in things that act by will is the motion of love, because every motion in things that have will is a motion of will. And therefore Dionysius says, in chapter 4 of The Divine Names, that divine love does not allow him to be without offspring; rather, it moves him to act, and so on. It is therefore necessary that the power of the heavens be from the Spirit; and therefore he says, "And by the spirit of his mouth, all their power." Mystically, by the heavens the apostles are understood: they were established by the word of the Lord, namely of Christ, or by the Son of the Lord; and this is his prayer and his teaching. Lk. 22: "I have prayed for you, that your faith may not fail," and so on. Likewise, their power was strengthened by the Holy Spirit. Lk. 24: "Stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high."

[87093] Then when he says, "Gathering together the waters of the sea as in a vessel," he shows the effect of God in the waters. In the waters, two wondrous things are to be considered. One is that the waters are gathered into one part of the earth and do not occupy the entire surface, which is wondrous for two reasons. First, because the natural order is that water should surround the whole earth, just as air surrounds water. Likewise, the sea is higher than the earth. Second, because although water continually evaporates through the heat of the sun, it is nevertheless preserved in the same quantity. And therefore he says two things: namely, that they are gathered into one by the command of God. Jer. 5: "I have placed the sand as a boundary of the sea, an everlasting decree which it shall not pass; and its waves shall toss and not prevail, and they shall swell and not pass over it." Job 38: "Who shut up the sea with doors," and so on, "its swelling waves?" And therefore he says, "Gathering together the waters of the sea as in a vessel." Water gathered in a vessel has trembling and rising, yet it does not flow out, because it is held back by the skin of the vessel. So the water gathered in the sea has swelling, and yet it does not flow, because it is contained by the divine power. Gen. 1: "Let the waters be gathered together," and so on. The other wondrous thing is that it continually evaporates and is not diminished. Hence, as certain philosophers say, all the water would be dried up by the power of the sun's heat according to nature. And therefore against this he says, "Placing the depths in storehouses." The abyss, according to Augustine, refers to the impassable depth of the waters; and it has a twofold interpretation: from "a," which means "without," and "basis," which means "foundation" -- as though without foundation, and without brightness, because it is deep and dark. In a treasury there are three things: for a treasury denotes a certain quantity of gold, and what is placed in a treasury is preserved -- hence it is called a "theca" (repository) of gold; likewise, it is placed there so that it may be drawn out for use. All of this is in the abyss: because in it there is an immense abundance or multitude of waters. Second, in the abyss the water is preserved and does not fail; third, the waters are drawn out for use, when vapors rise from them and rains are generated and the earth is irrigated. Ps. 17: "The fountains of waters appeared." Mystically, this is expounded in two ways: of the good and of the wicked. Of the good, so that by the waters of the sea we understand peoples. Rev. 17: "The many waters are peoples and nations and tongues." Therefore, as it were, the waters of the sea -- the peoples of this world -- he gathers in the Church as in a vessel. The Church is compared to a vessel because of its unity; and because a vessel is made from the skin of a dead animal, by this it is suggested that some come to the Church so that they may mortify their members which are upon the earth; for the apostles were confirmed as though they were heavens, and from these, peoples were gathered in the Church. "Placing the depths," that is, the profundity of divine meanings, "in storehouses" of Sacred Scripture. Is. 33: "The riches of salvation are wisdom and knowledge; the fear of the Lord is his treasure." Or, "the depths" formerly, namely sinners who were deep and dark with the shadows of vices, "placing them as treasures of gold" of the Church. Paul is a great treasure of the Church, and Matthew, and Magdalene, who were once as a kind of abyss. But in reference to the wicked, the water of the sea is understood as the tribulation of this life. Ps. 68: "The waters have come in even unto my soul." God confirms the heavens, yet he does not take away their infirmities, because grace is so preserved interiorly that it does not exclude infirmities exteriorly. And therefore he says that he gathers together the tribulations of them, namely of the heavens, that is, of heavenly men, "in a vessel," that is, in their bodies, "placing the depths," that is, the persecutors of the Church, "in storehouses," because he does not give them freedom to rage against the Church as much as they want.

[87094] Third, when he says, "Let all the earth fear," he shows the effect of God on earth. First, he sets forth a warning; second, he shows the effect of God regarding the earth, at "For he spoke and they were made," and so on. Concerning the first he does two things. First, he sets forth the warning; second, he explains it, at "But let all who dwell on the earth," and so on. He says therefore, "Let all the earth fear the Lord," and so on. But why did he place a warning here, when he spoke of other effects in which he used no warning, but only regarding the earth? The reason is that every other creature obeys God at a nod, except earthly man. And therefore he says, "All the earth," that is, every earthly man, "let him fear the Lord." Eccl. 12: "Fear God, and keep his commandments; for this is the whole of man." For this is a metonymic expression, so that the container is understood for the contained, when he says "earth," that is, the inhabitants of the earth. Second, he explains the warning, saying, "But let all who dwell on the earth be moved by him," and so on -- namely, with a good stirring to the service of God, because he alone draws. Jn. 6: "No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him."

[87095] Then when he says, "For he spoke," he shows a twofold effect regarding the earth. First, the effect of creation; second, of governance, at "The Lord brings to naught." In creation, two things are to be considered: namely, the formation itself and the creation itself. Both are present here. For first he shows the formation when he says, "He spoke," and so on. Second, the creation itself, when he adds, "He commanded," and so on. He says therefore, "For he spoke": Augustine, in book 7 of his Literal Commentary on Genesis, says that every formation is through the Word, because created things are related to God as artifacts to the artificer. Hence, just as all the forms of an artifact are from the form conceived in the mind of the artificer, so every form of things is from the divine Word conceived. Hence "He spoke," that is, he conceived the Word from eternity, and according to it all things were made. As if to say, he begot the Word, in which it was that all things should be made; and thus there is formation. Second, creation: because "He commanded and they were created." For to speak implies a formed word. To command implies merely a direction or emanation. Hence to command implies the creation of formless matter. Sir. 8: "His word is full of power." Mystically, "He spoke and they were made" by the seed of grace; "He commanded" in the work of truth. Ps. 103: "Send forth your spirit," and so on. But as to the work of governance, he says:

[87096] "The Lord." Because, remaining stable, he changes all things. And first, the change of all things is set forth; second, his stability, at "The counsel." Regarding the inhabitants of the earth, it should be noted that some are small and some are great; and both are changed. As to the small he says, "The Lord brings to naught," and so on. Where he touches on two things: namely, the purpose, which concerns the end, and the counsel, which concerns the means to the end. And this is changed, because one does not act according to what one has planned, but according to what God disposes. Is. 8: "Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to naught." And this is what he says, "The Lord brings to naught the counsels of nations." And he specifically brought to naught the counsel of those wishing to destroy the law of Christ. "And he rejects the devices of peoples" who think in merely human terms; for the Lord rejects such purposes. As to the great he says, "And he rejects the counsels of princes"; as if to say, not only of peoples, but also of princes he rejects the counsels, because it is not in their power to achieve their intended effect, but this lies in the divine ordering. Job 11: "He leads counselors to a foolish end."

[87097] Then when he says, "But the counsel," the stability of God is set forth, because his counsel stands and his thought perseveres. But is there counsel in God? It seems not, because it implies doubt. I respond: it must be said that counsel is understood differently in God and in us. For knowledge in us implies discursive reasoning, but in God it implies certitude. So with counsel: when it is in us, it denotes inquiry; but when it is said of God, it implies ordering of all things to their due end. Is. 46: "My counsel shall stand, and all my will shall be done." Acts 5: "If this counsel is from God, you will not be able to resist and dissolve it." "The thoughts of his heart," that is, the purpose of his will, endure; because if he changes his sentence, he does not change his counsel. Is. 55: "For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways."

[87098] "Blessed is the nation." Above he exhorted the just to joy; here he sets forth their dignity. And concerning this he does two things. First, he proposes their dignity; second, he proves it, at "From heaven." The dignity of the saints is supreme, because they alone arrive at what all men naturally desire. If one or a few were to arrive at a single thing that all desired to reach, this would be a great dignity. Now all men desire to tend toward beatitude, which nevertheless only the just attain, because they will obtain it perfectly in the future, but now in an incipient way and in hope. Therefore, the dignity of the just is great. Concerning their beatitude, begun here and to be perfected in the future, he touches on two things: namely, its matter and its cause, at "The people." He says therefore, "Blessed is the nation." Concerning beatitude, different philosophers have held different views. And according to the different opinions about this, there are different philosophical schools. Some placed it in bodily goods, such as Epicurus. Some in the works of the active life, such as the Stoics. Some in the contemplation of truth, such as the Peripatetics. To seek beatitude in what is below us is vain, because beatitude is above us. But what is above us is God. Therefore the beatitude of man is to cling to God. For each thing is perfect if it adheres to its proper good. But the proper good of man is God. Ps. 72: "For me, to adhere to God is good." Now one can cling to God with the mind, namely by intellect and will, not by sense, because this is common also to brute animals. Therefore man adheres to God in two ways: namely, by the intellect, through contemplation and knowledge, and by affection, through love. And because these are imperfect on the way, but perfect in the homeland, therefore here beatitude is imperfect, there it is perfect. And therefore he says, "Blessed is the nation." And why? "Because the Lord is its God," that is, it has its mind joined to God. Therefore, "blessed is the people whose God is the Lord." Heb. 11: "God is not ashamed to be called their God." But what is the cause of this? Is it nature, fortune, or one's own virtue? No. But divine election. Jn. 15: "You have not chosen me, but I have chosen you." Likewise, Jn. 6: "No one can come to me unless my Father who sent me draws him." And therefore he adds, "The people whom he has chosen"; as if to say, they are blessed because chosen by God. Eph. 1: "He chose us in him before the foundation of the world." And this "as his inheritance," that is, so that they themselves might be his inheritance. Inheritance implies stable possession. God possesses all things by dominion. But only the just are subject to him by their will; hence he chose them as his inheritance, that is, to possess justice forever. Wis. 1: "Justice is perpetual and immortal." Is. 19: "Israel is my inheritance." The Lord, therefore, is their God because they enjoy him. And they themselves are the inheritance of God because they are subject to him.

[87099] Then when he says, "From heaven," he proves their dignity through the examination of divine judgment. And concerning this he does three things. First, he sets forth the certainty of divine judgment. Second, he adds the vanity of human prosperity, at "The king is not saved." Third, the efficacy of grace in the saints, at "Behold, the eyes of the Lord." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he considers the certainty of divine judgment from its height; second, from its causality. And first he shows it from the first; second from the second, at "He who has formed." Concerning the first he does two things. First, he shows the certainty of divine judgment from its height. Second, he removes a doubt, at "From his prepared dwelling place." He says therefore, "From heaven," and so on. The higher any power is in the order and genus of power, the more efficacious it is for the works that befit that power. And therefore, the more refined any cognitive power is, the more efficacious it is in knowing. Nothing is so sublime as the divine intellect; and therefore its efficacy in knowing is supreme. And therefore he says, "From heaven," that is, from the height of the divine majesty. For just as nothing is higher than heaven among corporeal things, so nothing is higher than God among spiritual things. And therefore, because he looks from on high, he "sees all the children of men"; because the more he sees from on high, the more he sees: Prov. 16: "All the ways of men are open to his eyes."

[87100] Then when he says, "From his prepared dwelling place," he removes the doubt. For some believed that God dwells in the heavens as though in remote parts he would not know human affairs: Job 22: "He walks about the poles of heaven and does not consider our affairs." The Psalmist excludes this, saying, "From his prepared dwelling place"; as if to say, no one would prepare a place for himself so as to hinder himself. It would be different if another had prepared it. A king would be foolish who prepared for himself a throne where he could not govern his kingdom. And this is what he says, "From his prepared dwelling place," that is, from heaven, which he prepared for himself as his dwelling place -- not that he is contained by it, but because his glory shines forth more in it. He has looked, he says, "upon all who dwell on the earth," that is, upon the flesh, by subduing it: Ps. 112: "Who is as the Lord our God, who dwells on high and looks upon the lowly," and so on. Ps. 102: "The Lord has prepared his throne in heaven," and so on. Or, "from heaven," that is, from Christ. Through the angels or the apostles he has looked with the eye of his mercy to save men.

[87101] Then when he says, "He who has formed," he proves the certainty of divine knowledge from its causality. And concerning this he does two things. First, he sets forth its causality. Second, he concludes the certainty of its knowledge, at "He who understands." It would be foolish to say that someone who makes a certain crafted work would not know its use; for he would make it in vain, since the use is its end. And therefore he says elsewhere: Ps. 93: "He who formed the eye, does he not consider?" How then could it be that he would make something proportioned to knowing particulars unless he himself knew them? For man knows singular things through his intellect and soul and heart. Therefore God, who made that heart, knows them. And note that the words carry their weight. For he says "hearts," to exclude the unity of intellect in all, for different people have different intellects. He says "one by one," to show that the soul is not twofold; otherwise it would not be said that he formed them one by one, but one from which all derive, and thus likewise one by one. Therefore, he himself formed individual souls by themselves, namely through creation, since the soul is a substance subsisting in itself, not from matter. Likewise, he said "formed" to show that the soul is not made from the substance of God; otherwise it would not be called formed, but consubstantial. And he says pointedly "formed," because forming is the work of potters, who impress a beautiful form upon base material. So God, by creating, infuses the soul into the body of clay: 2 Cor. 4: "We have this treasure in earthen vessels": Rom. 9: "Does the thing formed say to him who formed it, 'Why have you made me thus?'" And from this he concludes that "he understands all their works"; for whoever knows the cause knows the effect. The cause of all human effects is the heart. God knows the heart. Therefore, he also knows its works. "He formed" is understood of the fashioning of grace, because the gifts of grace are from him, and this "one by one," because "there are different kinds of graces," 1 Cor. 12. And this because "he himself understands their works" by helping and advancing them.

[87102] "The king is not saved." Above, the Psalmist showed the dignity of the saints from the certainty of divine judgment, by which he intends to prove the dignity of the saints. Now in this part he shows the vanity of human prosperity. And concerning this he does two things. First, he shows that no temporal power can lead men to the salvation of the just. Second, he shows that this is accomplished by the mercy of God, at "Behold, the eyes of the Lord." He says therefore, "The king is not saved." But because secular power is threefold -- one consisting in the multitude of subjects, another in bodily strength, and another in exterior riches -- he therefore shows that none of these can lead to salvation. First, concerning the first power, which is royal; and therefore he says, "The king is not saved by his great power." Jerome has, "By a multitude," and so on. Ps. 145: "Do not put your trust in princes, in the children of men, in whom there is no salvation." Rather, if they sometimes have salvation, it is through God: Ps. 143: "Who gives salvation to kings." Second, he shows that salvation is not in bodily strength; hence he says, "And the giant shall not be saved by his great strength," that is, by his might: Bar. 3: "There were the giants, those renowned ones, who from the beginning," and so on. Third, that it is not in riches. And he mentions two supporting things: namely, the horse and abundance of possessions. As to the first he says, "The horse is deceptive," and so on, that is, however good a horse he has, still he cannot be saved bodily or spiritually: Prov. 21: "The horse is prepared for the day of battle, but the Lord gives salvation." As to the second he says, "And in the abundance of his strength he shall not be saved," that is, of exterior possessions: Prov. 11: "He who trusts in his riches shall fall": Is. 31: "Woe to those who go down to Egypt for help, trusting in horses." Mystically, morally, and allegorically this is expounded to mean that a man is not saved by his own power, whatever good he may possess. For there is a threefold good by which one might seem able to attain salvation. The first is authority; and as to this he says, "The king is not saved by his great power." If indeed he is powerful enough to rule others, this is not by his own power, but he has it from God. The second is constancy; and this he does not have by his own power; hence he says, "And the giant shall not be saved by his great strength." The third is good bodily disposition and fortitude; hence he says, "The horse is deceptive," namely, a strong and robust body is deceptive. Or, universally, "In the abundance of his strength," that is, wherever he has aptitude for good, "he is not saved" unless God grants him salvation: Ps. 29: "In my abundance I said, I shall never be moved. You turned away," and so on. This is what is said in Jer. 9: "Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, and let not the strong man glory in his strength, and let not the rich man glory in his riches."

[87103] Then when he says, "Behold, the eyes of the Lord," the efficacy of divine mercy for saving is shown. And first he sets forth the mercy that saves. Second, the disposition of the saints conceived from this consideration, at "Our soul." Concerning the first he does three things. First, he shows divine mercy. Second, in whom divine mercy has its effect, at "Upon those who fear him." Third, what effect it has, at "That he may deliver." He says therefore, "Behold, the eyes of the Lord." For he suggests divine mercy by the regard of God. Ps. 118: "Look upon me and have mercy on me." Upon whom he looks, he adds: "Upon those who fear him," and so on. Hab. 1: "Your eyes are too pure to behold evil, and you cannot look upon iniquity." Look therefore upon those who have both fear and hope. One without the other does not suffice, because fear without hope leads to despair, and hope without fear leads to presumption. Fear arises from the consideration of divine power. Jer. 10: "Who would not fear you, O King of nations?" Hope arises from God's mercy. From the first arises the flight from sin; from the second, the hope of pardon. He shows the effect of divine mercy when he says, "That he may deliver from death," and so on. Where he shows a twofold effect: he frees from evil, and as to this he says, "That he may deliver their souls from death." Likewise, he confirms in good; and as to this he says, "And that he may feed them." He says therefore, "That he may deliver their souls from death" -- from bodily death, and from the death of sin, and from the death of future damnation in the resurrection. Hos. 13: "I will deliver them out of the hand of death," and so on. He also confirms them in good; hence he says, "And that he may feed them in famine," that is, in necessity; and he speaks of bodily nourishment. Ps. 144: "The eyes of all hope in you, O Lord, and you give them food in due season." And of spiritual nourishment. Deut. 8: "Not by bread alone does man live, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God." And of sacramental nourishment. Jn. 6: "My flesh is truly food." "In the place of pasture there he has placed me": Ps. 22.

[87104] Then when he says, "Our soul," he shows what effect follows in these people from this consideration. And it is twofold. The first is the effect of hoping. The second, of praying, at "Let your mercy be upon us," and so on. Concerning the first he does two things. First, he shows how the effect of hope arises in them. Second, he assigns the reason, at "Because he is our helper." He says therefore: thus "the eyes of the Lord are upon those who fear him," and so on. And therefore "our soul waits for the Lord," that is, if any evils are sent upon us by God, let us endure them patiently. Jas. 5: "You have heard of the patience of Job." Likewise, awaiting his promises. He endures, therefore, both the one who punishes and the one who promises. And there is a twofold reason. One is because of the experience of benefits; the other because of the hope of future things. There: "In him our heart shall rejoice." The experience of benefits consists in the advancement of goods; hence he says, "Because he is our helper." Likewise, in protection from evils; and therefore he says, "And our protector." We hope, moreover, for future joy; hence he says, "In him our heart shall rejoice," that is, in his vision. Is. 66: "You shall see, and your heart shall rejoice." Job 22: "Then you shall abound in delights over the Almighty," and so on. And this joy is here imperfect, but there, in the homeland, it is perfect. And this because "in his holy name we have hoped." For "and" is used here in place of "because." His holy name is the name of his mercy; as if to say, therefore "we shall rejoice," because "we have hoped in his holy name," that is, in his goodness, or in his mercy, and not in our merits. Then when he says, "Let your mercy be upon us," the effect of prayer is set forth; for prayer is the interpreter of hope, and therefore it follows upon hope. And although every particular benefit is from divine mercy, two are especially from it. The first is the benefit of the incarnation: Lk. 1: "Through the tender mercy of our God," and so on. "Let your mercy be upon us," namely, that you may take on flesh and free us; "upon us," that is, above our merits. The other benefit is that of salvation; and this is "upon us," because "not by the works of justice that we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us," Tit. 3: "Even as we have hoped in you," because "no one has hoped in the Lord and been confounded," Sir. 2.