Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 43
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 43

[87221] Above, the Psalmist showed his desire for God; here, however, he proceeds to pray against the affliction of the whole people. The title: "Unto the end, a Psalm for the sons of Korah, unto understanding." The sons of Korah are the sons of the Passion of Christ; and these are properly the martyrs, because they imitate Christ. 1 Pet. 2: "Christ suffered for us," etc. And therefore it properly suits the martyrs. It is true that all good things, temporal and spiritual, are given by God. Temporal things are lesser goods; spiritual things, however, are greater. A father gives small things to small children, but great things to the mature. And God does likewise; for when men were in the state of little children, he gave them small things, that is, temporal things, as is evident in the Old Testament. Gal. 3: "They were like little children under a tutor," that is, under the observances of the law. Is. 1: "If you are willing and listen to me, you shall eat the good things of the land." But now, to those who are mature in the New Testament, temporal things are not promised, but harsh afflictions, and this under the hope of spiritual things. Lk. 6: "Blessed shall you be when men shall hate you," etc. And thus the intention is first to draw the men of the New Testament away from the appetite for earthly prosperity promised in the Old Testament. This Psalm is therefore divided into three parts. First he treats of past prosperity. Second, of present adversity, at "But now you have cast us off." Third, he asks for help against these things, at "Arise." Concerning the first he does two things: first he enumerates the benefits bestowed on the ancients; second he shows that he has hope for greater things, at "You yourself are." Concerning the first he does three things: first he introduces the report of the benefits; second, the time, at "The work which"; third he sets forth the benefit itself, at "Your hand." Concerning the first, he first proposes the manner of hearing; second, from whom they heard. He begins with the invocation of the divine name, when he says, "O God." And this Psalm proceeds in the manner of a prayer, which is the ascent of the mind to God; or because in this Psalm he treats of prosperous and adverse things. In adversity a man has regard for God as a defender. Ps. 120: "To the Lord, when I was in tribulation," etc. In prosperity he invokes God with joy. Sir. 26: "As one who is thirsty enters joyfully to a fountain." "We have heard." Hearing is necessary for wisdom. Sir. 6: "If you love to hear, you shall be wise." And it is also necessary for the wise. Prov. 1: "A wise man hearing shall be wiser." Likewise it is necessary for everyone, because no one is sufficient to devise all things that pertain to wisdom; and therefore no one is so wise that he cannot be instructed by another, because if he hears good things, he is helped by receiving them; if he hears bad things, he is helped by learning better. "With our ears." He hears with his own ears who hears with ears subject to reason. Hence a man is called such insofar as he has reason. When the ears are subject to reason, they are human; when they are not subject to reason, they are brutish. Lk. 8: "He who has ears to hear, let him hear," that is, let him consider. "Our fathers have declared to us." Here he shows that he heard from those who wished to teach the truth, because they are fathers. Deut. 32: "Ask your fathers," etc. Likewise, from those who were able to teach the truth, because they were ancient. Job 12: "In the ancient is wisdom." "The work that you wrought in their days." Here he sets forth the time in which he heard these things. Certain benefits are ancient, which they themselves saw; hence he says, "And in the days of old." "Your hand." Here he sets forth the benefit itself. Second he sets forth the order of the benefit, and the cause of the benefit. In the benefit we consider the work and the fruit of the work. The work of divine power is that he drove out the nations before them; hence he says, "Your hand," that is, your power. For by bodily members in God is signified the action that we exercise through them. He destroyed the nations, that is, he destroyed the inhabitants of the Promised Land, even physically. Ps. 59: "Scatter them by your power." The fruit is that they succeeded them. Job 34: "He shall crush many and innumerable, and make others stand in their place." Therefore he says, "And you planted them." Ex. 15: "You shall bring them in and plant them," etc. What is planted takes root so as to bear fruit. Is. 5: "I expected that it would bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes." "You afflicted the peoples." Here is the manner and order of the benefit: because they were not destroyed all at once, since the land would have been uncultivated and wild beasts would have multiplied; and therefore he gradually consumed them. Hence he says, "You afflicted the peoples," both through wars and through wild beasts and hornets. Josh. 24: "I sent hornets before you." Wis. 12: "You sent wasps as forerunners of your army." "And you drove them out," thus gradually afflicting them. Ps. 78: "He drove out the nations before them." "For not by their own sword did they possess the land." Here is set forth the cause of the benefit. And first he excludes the supposed cause; second he sets forth the true cause. The supposed cause could be the strength of the people, that they had driven them out; and therefore, removing this, he says, "Not by their own sword," etc. There is a twofold strength of man: one from experience with arms, and this he excludes: "Not by their own sword did they possess the land." Jth. 7: "The children of Israel do not trust," etc. And there follows: "They conquered not with the sword." The other is natural strength; and this he excludes, saying, "And their own arm did not save them," that is, their power. Ps. 33: "A king is not saved by a great army." Deut. 32: "Lest they should say: Our hand is exalted, and the Lord has not done all these things." The true cause, however, is that it was done by God; hence he says, "But your right hand," etc. And he sets forth four things: three pertaining to the execution and the fourth to the effect. If a king wishes to help someone, he does three things for him. First he gives him favor; second he expends the help of his work; third he gives counsel in directing. God did likewise for them. For first he was favorable to them and gave them prosperity; and this is signified by the right hand, by which prosperity is signified. Ex. 15: "Your right hand is made glorious." Likewise he gave them help; and this is signified by the arm. Lk. 1: "He has shown might with his arm." Third, he directed them, at "And the light of your countenance," that is, proceeding directly from your providence. The fourth pertains to the effect: "Because you were pleased with them"; as if to say: why did you do these things for us? Was it on account of our merits? No. Deut. 9: "Do not say in your heart, when the Lord your God shall have destroyed them in your sight: For my justice the Lord brought me in to possess this land." But this was on account of the grace of God: "Because you were pleased," etc.; that is, it was your good pleasure, O God, in them. Mt. 11: "Because such was your good pleasure before you."

[87222] "You yourself are." Here is set forth the hope he has for a greater benefit, which arises from hope in God himself. And therefore he does three things. First he proposes the cause of hope; second, confidence, at "Through you we shall push back our enemies"; third, thanksgiving, at "In God we shall glory." Concerning the first he does three things. First he sets forth the immutability of God; second, his governance; third, the experience of divine help. He shows the immutability of God, because God did this for the fathers; and again, because his power has not diminished, and therefore he can do even greater things for them. Hence he says, "You yourself are my king and my God," who are not diminished. Likewise the care of man also pertains to you as it did then; hence he says, "My king," who defends and governs, "and my God," who provides for me. Deut. 6: "Hear, O Israel," etc. Therefore I trust, as they also trusted. Likewise from experience, because you alone are the one who saves; hence he says, "Who commands the salvation of Jacob." And he says this because formerly he saved through others, but here he himself saves. Is. 25: "Behold, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will come and save us." "Through you we shall push back our enemies." Here he sets forth the confidence he has in God. And first he proposes what he hopes; second he shows that he attributes this to God; third he sets forth the cause. He hopes for help against enemies, against whom he has a twofold help: one, that he may conquer the enemy; and as to this he says, "Through you," that is, by your power, not by our own, "we shall scatter with our horn," that is, our enemies, whether in the present or in the future. And he says "horn," by way of likeness, because the attacking power of the ox is in its horn. And he says "we shall scatter," because on the threshing floor the chaff is separated from the wheat; so at the judgment the evil will be taken away and the good will remain. The other help is that he not be conquered by the enemy; and as to this he says, "In your name we shall despise those who rise up against us," that is, by your power we shall despise all our enemies in the future or in the present, because they could do us no harm.

[87223] "For not." In the preceding verse the Psalmist set forth the hope of repelling enemies; here, however, he shows the reason for what was said, namely what he said, "Through you our enemies," and therefore he shows that he does not hope in himself: because "nor in my bow." For in 1 Sam. 2 it is said: "The bow of the mighty is overcome." Likewise he does not hope even in the sword; hence, "And my sword shall not save me." Ps. 37: "Let their sword be broken." For with these two one fights: namely, with the bow against those at a distance; hence by the bow is designated man's cunning, by which he provides for himself in the future; as if to say: I do not hope in my own foresight. With the sword one fights against those nearby, in which is designated power; as if to say: nor do I hope in my own power, but in you. Whence do you have this hope? From God. And he shows this through experience. "For you have saved us from those who afflict us": either in the present, because even if they harm us bodily, they nevertheless cannot harm us spiritually; or in the future. The saints are afflicted in two ways: sometimes in bodily things, by words or by deeds. 1 Sam. 1: "Her rival also afflicted her." Sometimes they are afflicted spiritually, when those who dwell near them sin. And from these afflictions they are freed by God. "And those who hate us you have put to shame," since they cannot achieve their intention against us; and they are confounded here, and shall be confounded in the future. Is. 41: "Behold, all shall be confounded and ashamed, all who fight against you."

[87224] "In God." Here thanksgiving is set forth. And first he sets forth the praise by which they themselves shall be praised. Second he sets forth the praise by which they themselves shall praise. For in the first they shall both praise and be praised; therefore he says, "all the day," that is, for eternity. And this praise is holy, because it is not in themselves but in God. Jer. 17: "You are my praise." Ps. 150: "Praise the Lord in his holy ones." Likewise it will be continual, because "all the day" of eternity. Ps. 84: "Better is one day in your courts than a thousand." They shall be praised, I say, by Christ. Mt. 10: "Whoever shall confess me before men, I will confess," that is, I will praise him, "before my Father." Jerome has, "In God they shall praise," because the saints in heaven shall praise God by contemplating his goodness, and they shall give thanks, being grateful for his benefits.

[87225] "But now." Here he sets forth the adversity of the saints of the New Testament. And first he sets forth the adversity they suffer. Second he sets forth their patience and steadfastness, at "All these things have come upon us." Concerning the adversity of the saints, he first touches on the cause of the adversity: namely, the withdrawal of divine help. Second he touches on the order, at "You have turned us back." A holy man has three things in God: namely, refuge. Ps. 90: "Lord, you have been our refuge." Prov. 18: "The name of the Lord is a strong tower; the just man runs to it and shall be exalted." Second, he has glory in God. Ps. 3: "You are my glory." Third, help itself. Ps. 121: "My help is from the Lord." Sometimes, however, in external things it appears that a man does not have refuge in God; and therefore he says, "But now you have cast us off," because formerly you were our refuge. And this insofar as you do not defend us from the one who assails us. Lam. 2: "The Lord has cast off his altar." Yet he has not cast off in respect to interior things, because "the Lord will not cast off his people," Ps. 94. Likewise, "You are not my glory," because "you have put us to shame"; you seem to shame us in external things, when you allow our humiliation. Likewise you used to counsel and help; but now you do not, because "you will not go forth, O God, with our armies." And he speaks after the manner of a general. It was the custom in the Old Testament that when God aided the people fighting, then God went forth before the people. Hab. 3: "You went forth for the salvation of your people," etc. This, however, does not signify local movement in God, but the proceeding of his providence toward external things. Now, however, God does not go forth, while he permits us to succumb to our enemies. And he does this to draw us away from earthly things, because if there were always prosperity in temporal things, man would serve God for them. And if this were our intention, it would be frustrated in those things. Therefore, so that our love may not be mercenary and our intention may not be directed to bodily things, he withdraws these from his friends.

[87226] "You have turned us back." Here is set forth the order of the adversity of holy men, with respect to two things: namely, with respect to the consolation they do not have, and with respect to the affliction they suffer. Men who go to battle flee, are captured, are killed, are scattered, and are sold. As to the first he says, "You have turned us back before our enemies," that is, you have made us flee. Deut. 28: "By one way you shall go out against them, namely the enemies, and by seven ways you shall flee." This pertains especially to the holy martyrs, because in persecution some, unable to endure, turned away from the faith. 2 Pet. 2: "It would have been better for them not to have known the way of justice than, after knowing it, to turn back." Some fled. Mt. 10: "If they persecute you in one city, flee to another." As to the second he says, "And those who hate us have plundered for themselves." Tob. 3: "We have been given over to plundering." Is. 42: "But this is a people plundered and laid waste." This also happens to the saints, because some were plundered by the Devil, namely those who denied the faith; likewise some were captured by enemies while fleeing. As to the third he says, "We have been made a reproach," and this because they killed us bodily. As to the fourth he says, "And among the nations you have scattered us," because literally this happened to the Jews. Deut. 28: "You shall be scattered to every wind," etc. Similarly, the holy martyrs were scattered. As to the fifth he says, "You have sold your people for no price," because the martyrs were killed for no price, that is, no great price. In this it is shown that they were held as worthless. Is. 52: "You were sold for nothing, and there was no great number in exchange for them." Jerome has, "You did not profit." A usurer gives little and receives much; as if to say: not many profited there, because few were converted at that time; hence more died than were converted. Or, "there was not a great number" of others who sang psalms to God at their death. Lam. 1: "The ways of Zion mourn, because there are none who come to the solemn feast."

[87227] "You have made us." Above, the Psalmist set forth the oppression of the saints; here he sets forth their vilification. And first he sets forth the vilification they suffered outwardly. Second he shows what results from this in the heart, at "All the day my shame." Concerning the first he sets forth the process of vilification from the point of view of the baseness of men and from the point of view of the baseness of the thing. From the point of view of the baseness of men, it is that first a reproach is spoken to someone, namely that he is a thief or an adulterer. Second he suffers this as a mockery. Third it grows into a byword, that is, into infamy. From the point of view of persons: first from his companion; second it passes to others; third it is spread abroad. And as to the first he says, "We have been made a reproach to our neighbors," that is, to brothers and relatives, because the saints were called sacrilegious, murderers, or other such things. And this mocking is done by gestures; hence he says, "a scoff." And by words; hence he says, "and a derision." A scoff is when someone mocks by wrinkling his nose. Derision is when with amusement or laughter he speaks things that pertain to blame. Jer. 20: "I am made a derision; all the day long everyone scoffs at me." And he says, "to those who are round about us"; as if to say: not only to neighbors, but now to others we have become an object of reproach and shame. Thus also the holy martyrs were derided by all. 1 Cor. 4: "We have become as the refuse of this world." As to the third they are mocked, because people speak of them as they would sing; hence he says, "You have made us a byword among the nations." When evil is inflicted on someone, it becomes a proverb, and people say: may the same happen to you as happened to such a person. And thus one who is mistreated is made a reproach. Perhaps some said: may the same happen to you as to Lawrence and the others. And therefore he says, "You have made us a byword among the nations," that is, as an example of evil and reproach. Job 17: "He has made me a byword of the people, and I am an example before them." 1 Kgs. 9: "This house shall be an example." Likewise this is done by deed and by gesture; hence he says, "a shaking of the head among the peoples." Mt. 27: "Those passing by blasphemed him, shaking their heads." Ps. 22: "They spoke with their lips and shook their heads." Or, "You have made us," that is, into the likeness of Christ, that is, you have caused us to suffer what Christ suffered; as if to say: just as the nations shook their heads at Christ in blasphemy, so they have done to us.

[87228] "All the day." Here he treats of what is born in the heart from outward reproach. And first he sets forth the shame. Second he adds the cause, at "At the voice." First he sets forth the shame, and says, "All the day my shame is before me," that is, it is continually in my sight. Or, "against me," that is, against what is owed to me, namely the honor that is owed to the virtuous. Shame, according to the Philosopher, is the fear of disgrace. Now there is a twofold disgrace. The first is according to truth, and this is the disgrace of sin; and shame regarding such a thing does not befall the virtuous, because they do not have in themselves a consciousness of sin for which they could be ashamed. But it befalls the wicked. Rom. 6: "What fruit did you have then in those things of which you are now ashamed?" The other disgrace is according to estimation, namely that one suffers outwardly abject things or reproaches; and this is found also in perfect men. And of this he speaks here, "All the day," etc. The sign of shame is a blush on the face. Shame is the fear of confusion; and this passion stirs up the vital spirits, and therefore the blood is altered. And the shameless are pale, and the shameful are red. Yet the fearful who fear death become pale, but not those who fear reproach. And the reason is that nature withdraws itself to the place where there is a deficiency; hence when one fears for one's life, the blood and spirits withdraw to the principle of life, namely the heart. But when one fears something external, the spirits and blood withdraw to the exterior parts. He says therefore, "And the confusion of my face has covered me," that is, it has clothed my countenance with redness. And he says, "The confusion of my face," because it is born in the face; but when it is so great that it covers the whole body, it is caused by being trampled upon and vilified. As to the second he says, "At the voice of one who reproaches." Reproach is when a taunt is cast in someone's face. Ps. 102: "All the day they reproached me," etc. Slander is a secret detraction. Eccl. 10: "If a serpent bites in silence, it is no less than one who secretly slanders." Thus it was done to the saints in the time of persecution; for Maximus had wicked women seized and made them confess that Christians had committed evil deeds with them. Hence he says, "At the voice of one who reproaches." They also reproached Christ, both in himself and in his members. And therefore he says, "At the face of the enemy and the persecutor." And therefore he says "enemy," because hatred is the cause of persecution. 1 Cor. 4: "We suffer persecution for the sake of justice, and we endure."

[87229] "All these things." Here he shows their perseverance in good. And he proposes their stability in two respects. A man ought to persist in those things that pertain to faith and in good works. And he says that on account of all these things that have come upon us, that is, on account of all the aforementioned adversities, they neither abandoned the faith in their heart; hence he says, "Nor have we forgotten you." Ps. 88: "All your waves," etc. Nor did they abandon divine worship; hence it follows, "And we have not dealt unjustly in your covenant," that is, we have not abandoned the knowledge we have of you through faith. Nor your covenant. The covenant of God is the pact entered into with him in the law and in Baptism; hence whoever acts against the observance of divine worship commits iniquity against the covenant of God. And the martyrs did not do this. Jerome has, "And they have not lied against you," because, namely, they did not offend against him even in word. Sir. 11: "Stand by your covenant." Likewise they are stable in the good works of justice, which proceed from an upright heart; and therefore he says, "Our heart has not turned back," through the abandonment of charity. Lk. 9: "No one putting his hand to the plow," etc. Is. 1: "They are turned away backward," namely sinners. But the charity of the martyrs was in no way diminished, as regards the works themselves. And he says, "Nor have you turned aside our steps from your way"; as if to say: you have not permitted our actions to turn aside from the way of your justice. Is. 30: "This is the way; walk in it." Or, "You have turned aside," according to another reading, "our steps," that is, our paths are those to which our nature leads us of itself, namely according to concupiscence. And thus, because it leads to the ways of our heart, in which one should not walk, you have driven such ways away from your way.

[87230] "Because." Above, the Psalmist set forth the evils that the saints suffer, and their constancy; here, however, he gives the reason for what has been said. And this can be connected with the preceding in two ways, according to the two senses stated, at "You have turned aside our steps," that is, the ways by which we seek the things of the flesh. And according to this it is connected thus; as if to say: you have not permitted us to turn aside to the things of the flesh, "because you have humbled us in the place of affliction," that is, of the world. Eccl. 1: "I have seen all things that are done under the sun, and behold, all is vanity." And in this God humbles the saints in two ways: namely, by the humiliation of virtue. Ps. 35: "I humbled my soul in fasting." And by the humiliation of compulsion. Ps. 105: "They humbled them in fetters," etc. As to the second he says, "And the shadow of death has covered us," that is, the sign of approaching death; for the shadow precedes, and afterward we have the sentence of death. Or, "the shadow of death," that is, sinners who are in darkness have subjected us to themselves and to their servitude. Job 28: "The torrent separates from the wandering people the stone of darkness and the shadow of death." "If we have forgotten." Here he proves what he said. And first he proposes the claims. Second he sets forth the divine judgment. Third he gives a clear sign. He says therefore: I said, we have not forgotten you, etc. And therefore he proposes: "If we have forgotten the name of our God"—"if," that is, we have not. Likewise, "If we have stretched out our hands to a strange god"—strange, namely, from the divine nature and from the rite of the Jews; as if to say: if we pray to them as gods, which is to act unjustly against the covenant of God. And if we have done these things, the judgment of God will seek it out. And the judgment of God is sufficient for seeking this out; hence he says, "Shall not God search out these things?" As if to say: indeed he will, because he knows all things. Hence it follows, "For he knows the hidden things of the heart." Jer. 17: "The heart of man is perverse and unsearchable, and who shall know it?" As if to say: God alone. Likewise he proves this through a clear sign, because if they had wished to withdraw, the saints would suffer no evils in this world, as they now suffer. And first he sets forth the reason why they suffer, because the cause makes the martyr; and therefore he says, "For your sake we are put to death all the day long." 1 Pet. 4: "Let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or a slanderer, or as one who covets what belongs to others; but if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed." Second he sets forth the evils they suffer; and first he shows these to be evils from the gravity of the punishment, from its continuity, and from public opinion. The gravity of the punishers: because "we are put to death." Continuity: because "all the day long." 1 Cor. 15: "I die daily, for your glory." Opinion: because they believed they were killing them not as blessed but as wicked and worthy of death; and therefore he says, "We are regarded as sheep for the slaughter." For the benefit of men, or for the patience of the martyrs; as if to say: why are we put to death all the day long, and yet we do not cry out but endure like sheep led to slaughter? So also it was with Christ.

[87231] "Arise, why do you sleep, O Lord?" Here he invokes the help of God. And first a question of wonder is set forth. Second, a petition for divine help. We therefore wonder because he permits his saints to be so afflicted. And this can be either from a defect of will or of knowledge. That he does not will it happens in two ways: either from sluggishness or from contempt. As to the first he says, "Why do you sleep, O Lord?" As if to say: is it because of sluggishness that you permit us to be afflicted? And he is said to sleep on account of the effect. Ps. 121: "Behold, he shall neither slumber nor sleep, who guards Israel." As to the second he says, "And do not cast us off to the end," that is, finally, even if you seem to have cast us off for a time. And this is said of Christ, so that it may be our word; as if to say: you have hidden yourself and have not yet risen in the faith of the nations. Rise in them, and we shall not be cast off by them. "Why do you turn away your face?" The defect of knowledge happens in two ways: either because he does not see, and therefore he says, "You turn away." When God helps, he seems to look upon us; when he does not, he seems to turn away. Ex. 3: "Seeing I have seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt," etc. Ps. 27: "Turn not your face from me." Or, "Why do you turn away your face," so that we may not see it; for if we could see it, we would suffer no evil. Or because he has forgotten. And therefore he says, "You forget our need and our tribulation." Here he enumerates the evils we suffer. And there is a threefold evil: in external things, in the body, and in the soul. As to the first he says, "You forget our need," because literally they were poor on account of goods taken away. Heb. 10: "You received with joy the plundering of your goods." As to the second he says, "our tribulation," because "many are the tribulations of the just," Ps. 34. As to the third he says, "Because our soul is humbled in the dust." Some are humbled in soul, some in body, some inwardly in spirit. And therefore he says, "Our belly has cleaved to the earth." And he puts "belly" for the whole body. Or what he says, "Our soul is humbled in the dust," refers to the effect in spiritual things: because "soul," that is, the thought of the soul, thinks of earthly things. Is. 29: "You shall speak from the earth, and your speech shall be heard from the ground." And "belly," that is, sensuality, totally clings to the earth. Or otherwise: "Because our soul has been humbled," etc., that is, the more perfect among us have been humbled by the dust, that is, by the sinner. Ps. 1: "Like the dust which the wind drives away," etc. Likewise, "belly," that is, the weak among us, have clung to earthly men, because they have departed from the faith. Against his forgetting he says, "Help us." Against his sleeping he says, "Arise." Against the evils he says, "And redeem us for the sake of your name."
