Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 45
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 45

[87243] After the Psalmist sought divine help against the adversities he suffers from enemies, when he said "O God, with our ears," and then, as one already heard, showed the glory of the king, saying "My heart has poured forth"; here, having been heard on behalf of the people, he shows the benefit given to the people. And just as through the preceding Psalm the glory of Christ is designated, so in this Psalm the benefits shown to the faithful of Christ are designated. Hence this is also indicated in the title, and there is a twofold reading: "Unto the end, a Psalm of David, for hidden things." The hidden things that are from the beginning are concealed, namely that the Son of God became man, that God would die, that the nations would be converted to Christ. These were most secret. Is. 24: "My secret is my own." Eph. 3: "It was not made known to the other sons of men." And these have been revealed through Christ. Mt. 13: "I will utter things hidden." Job 28: "He brought hidden things to light." This Psalm, therefore, tending unto the end, that is, unto Christ, is "of David, for hidden things," that is, for the manifestation of hidden things. Another reading has "for the sons of Korah." By Korah, which is interpreted "Calvary," the cross of Christ is understood. This Psalm, therefore, is attributed to the faithful of the cross of Christ, for the revelation of hidden things. Jerome has "for the living." For here it treats of tribulation and preservation in them. It is therefore "for the living," that is, for those who are preserved in life; and those who are preserved by the help of God are said to be in hiding. Ps. 30: "He has protected me in the hiding place of his face, from the disturbance of men." This Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. First, he treats of divine help against tribulations. Second, he treats of the peace granted after tribulations, at "Come and see." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth the cause of these benefits. Second, he explains the evils and the benefits given against the evils, at "They roared." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth God's help against past tribulations. Second, he sets forth the confidence conceived regarding future ones, at "Therefore we will not fear." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he touches upon God's help. Second, the tribulation against which divine help is given. If someone wishes to assist one who is afflicted, he does it in three ways. First, by receiving the one fleeing -- and this is little. Second, by standing by the one placed in tribulation. Third, by providing him with external aid. And God does these three things, for he is a refuge; and therefore he says, "Our God is a refuge." Prov. 18: "The name of the Lord is a very strong tower." Likewise, he helps and strengthens those who fight and are afflicted; therefore he says, "a strength." Is. 40: "He gives power to the faint." Likewise, he helps externally, through himself and through others; hence he says, "a helper." Ps. 9: "A helper in times of need." This help is necessary "in the tribulations that have found us exceedingly." These tribulations are both spiritual and bodily. Spiritual tribulations are sins; and these find people exceedingly, because the sorrow of penance is the greatest among all sorrows. Ps. 37: "I am afflicted and humbled exceedingly." And in this tribulation Christ is a refuge, because in it he consoles, and by him a person is strengthened and helped. Bodily tribulations were those suffered by the saints in the early Church. 2 Cor. 1: "We were burdened beyond measure." And therefore he says "exceedingly." Jerome has: "Help has been found in tribulations, powerfully." And so the word "exceedingly" refers to divine help. "Therefore we will not fear." Ps. 26: "The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear?" As if to say: I will fear no one. And rightly, because he himself is "our God, a refuge and strength, a helper in the tribulations that have found us exceedingly." Second, he shows what things are to be feared. But two things are to be feared: namely, general tribulation and the oppression of the great. General tribulation is when all are slaughtered. The other is when leaders are captured. In these, fear has its place. But "I will not fear while the earth is troubled," that is, even if the whole people is tribulated, "and the mountains are transferred into the heart of the sea." Nor will I fear even if the great are captured. But mystically, by "earth," which is solid, Judea is understood, which was solid in the knowledge of the one God, and fixed, and surrounded by nations, just as the earth is surrounded by the sea and encircled by waters. Is. 1: "Your land is desolate." And so it signifies the persecution that the faithful suffered from the Jews. As if to say: I will not fear while Judea is troubled by the preaching of Christ. Mt. 2: "When Herod heard this, he was troubled," etc. And I will not fear, because "the mountains," that is, the apostles, will transfer themselves to the nations. Acts 13: "Behold, we turn to the Gentiles." "Into the heart of the sea," that is, into the expansion of the Gentiles, because the Gentiles held the apostles in great reverence. Or "into the heart of the sea," that is, to the depths and the ends of the earth. Acts 22: "I will send you far away to the nations."

[87244] "They roared and the waters were troubled." Here he shows what these tribulations are. And first, he proposes them in metaphor. Second, he explains. He says therefore, "They roared and their waters were troubled." According to Jerome, "its waters." And this is the better reading; and the sense is: the waters of it, that is, of the sea, namely the people, "shall be transferred into the heart of the sea; they roared" on account of anger against us. Ps. 87: "All your waves," etc. But the "mountains," that is, the rulers such as Nero and others, "were troubled by his strength," namely God's strength, because by this strength even the mountains themselves were troubled. The Hebrew has "in its pride." Mystically, he speaks thus: "The mountains roared," that is, the apostles who are called mountains; "the waters were troubled," that is, the peoples of the Gentiles, at the sound of the mountains, that is, at the preaching of the apostles. Waters signify wisdom; as if to say: the waters, that is, the prophecies of the Gentiles, are troubled. 1 Cor. 1: "I will destroy the wisdom of the wise," etc. Or "the mountains," that is, the apostles, "were troubled," namely outwardly through tribulations, "by the strength of the sea." But he seems to say the contrary elsewhere: "The just man shall not be troubled," Ps. 36. But it must be said that this is true interiorly, because "nothing that happens to the just man shall trouble him."

[87245] "Of the river." Under a certain likeness he set forth the tribulations that the saints endured; here, however, under another likeness he proposes the divine consolation with respect to two things: namely, with respect to the abundance of divine grace, and with respect to the solace of the divine presence, at "God is in the midst of it." And just as tribulation is expressed under the likeness of roaring and troubled waters, so consolation is expressed under the likeness of a river, which signifies grace on account of the abundance of water, because in grace there is an abundance of gifts. Ps. 64: "The river of God is filled with water." And because it is derived from a source, namely a spring, but the spring is not from the river, because the spring is in its origin; and the Holy Spirit is from the Father and the Son. Rev. 22: "He showed me a river of living water, bright as crystal, proceeding from the throne of God and of the Lamb." Likewise, because a river moves sand and stones, so the Holy Spirit moves the heart to action. Jn. 7: "Rivers from his belly," etc. But some rivers have a slow motion; this one is not like that, because it is swift. Hence he says, "The rush of the river." And this refers to two things. First, because the Holy Spirit suddenly pours grace into the heart. Acts 2: "Suddenly there came a sound from heaven," etc. In another way, because the Holy Spirit moves the heart by the rush of love. Is. 59: "When the violent river comes." Rom. 8: "Those who are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God." Song 4: "A fountain of gardens... which flow with a rush from Lebanon." Jerome has "the divisions of the river." And these are the graces of the Holy Spirit, because "there are divisions of graces," 1 Cor. 12. The effect is twofold. One is of joyfulness; and this he designates when he says, "It makes glad the city of God." And this is made manifest from the authority of Sacred Scripture, which says, Rom. 14: "The kingdom of God is not food and drink, but justice and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit." Gal. 5: "The fruit of the Spirit is peace, joy," etc. And because it makes one love God. And in this love there is always joyfulness, because everyone delights in the presence of the beloved; and he who loves God has God present. 1 Jn. 4: "He who abides in love," etc. This city is the Church. Ps. 86: "Glorious things are said of you, O city of God," etc. There are three things in this city that belong to its very nature. The first is that there should be a multitude of free persons; because if there is one person or few, it is not a city; and similarly if they are slaves. And this is found especially in the Church. Gal. 4: "We are not children of the handmaid, but of the free woman." The second is that it should have sufficiency in itself. For in a village, not everything necessary for human life is found for the healthy and the sick; but in a city, everything necessary for life must be found. And this sufficiency is in the Church, because whatever is necessary for the spiritual life is found in it. Ps. 64: "We shall be filled with the good things of your house." The third is the unity of the citizens, because from this, namely from the unity of citizens, the city takes its name, since a city is, as it were, a unity of citizens. And this exists in the Church. Jn. 17: "That they may be one in us, as we also are one." This city, therefore, is made glad by the grace of the Holy Spirit descending into it. The second effect is of sanctification; hence he says, "The Most High has sanctified his tabernacle." This tabernacle is, in one way, the city itself. In a city, those who rest dwell; in a tabernacle, the Church militant, which here has peace from God, yet suffers unrest from the world. Jn. 16: "In the world you will have tribulation; but in me, peace." And therefore, on account of the first, it is called a city; on account of the second, it is called a tabernacle. This, therefore, the Most High sanctified through his own blood. Heb. 13: "Jesus, that he might sanctify through his own blood," etc. Likewise, through the sacraments in which the power of the blood of Christ operates. 1 Cor. 6: "But you have been washed, but you have been sanctified, but you have been justified." Or alternatively: in a city and in an army, the principal tabernacle is that of the king or commander. So in this city, that is, the Church, the principal tabernacle is the body of Christ. And the body is called a tabernacle. 2 Pet. 1: "Knowing that the putting off of my tabernacle is swift." And so the body of Christ is a tabernacle, because in it is the whole fullness of divinity. This tabernacle the Most High sanctified -- not that he was ever not holy, but because in the very conception he himself formed it holy; and this was singular in Christ.

[87246] "God is in the midst of it." Here the consolation from the divine presence is set forth. And first he sets forth the benefit of this presence. Second, its effects, at "It shall not be moved." He says therefore, "God is in the midst," namely, of the Church. 1 Cor. 14: "Truly declaring that God is among you." And he says "in the midst," to show that he is not a respecter of persons, as is said in Acts 10 and Eph. 6. For "the middle" is said of that which is equally distant from the extremes. And God, as far as he is concerned, relates equally to all: Lk. 24: "Jesus stood in the midst of the disciples": Gen. 2: "The tree of life was in the midst of Paradise." Or he says "in the midst" because the heart is said to be in the middle of a person. Since, therefore, he dwells in our hearts, he is said to be in the midst. The effect is twofold: stability against evils, and firmness for good things. It is said, therefore, that because "God is in the midst of it," namely of this city, "it shall not be moved," that is, it will be made firm and stable: Ps. 124: "Those who trust," etc. Mt. 16: "The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it." As to the second, he says, "God will help it." For not only must stability against evils be given, but also help for accomplishing good things. He says therefore, "God will help it," that is, the Church, "in the morning, at daybreak." By "morning" the beginning of a good work is understood. Some say that the beginning of good is from a natural principle, but its end and completion are from God. But against this is what is said here, that "morning," that is, from the very beginning of a good work. One beginning of a good work on the part of the intellect is thought; the other on the part of the will; and these two are from God, because "we are not sufficient to think anything of ourselves" (as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3), "but our sufficiency is from God." Likewise, "in him is the willing and the accomplishing," as the same Apostle says, Phil. 2. And by the addition of "at daybreak," it is signified that the Church is helped through the spiritual illumination of the Holy Spirit: Is. 60: "Arise, be illuminated," etc. Another reading has "with his countenance"; and this refers either to the present state -- and so it signifies the presence of his help, as principally coming to her aid, according to Ps. 79: "Show us your face, O Lord, and we shall be saved." Or to the future state -- as if to say: now he is in the midst of it, and he permits it to be shaken, but in the future he will provide it with help by the sight of his countenance: Ps. 20: "You will make him glad with joy before your countenance." In the Hebrew, the text reads thus. And if "morning" and "daybreak" are taken for the same thing, namely the consideration of daybreak, since the early morning is the best hour for contemplation: Ps. 5: "In the morning I will stand before you." Likewise, Ps. 62: "In the morning hours I will meditate on you." As if to say: "God will help it with his countenance," that is, in the contemplation of his greatness. And these things can be referred to the Blessed Virgin, because she is the city; in her he dwelt; the rush of the river, namely the Holy Spirit, made her glad; he sanctified her in the womb of her mother, after the body was formed and the soul created. Then first "the glory of the Lord covered the tabernacle," as is said in Ex. 40. And the sanctification of the Blessed Virgin is different from that of other saints, because others were so sanctified that they never sinned mortally, yet they did sin venially: 1 Jn. 1: "If we say that we have no sin," etc. But the Blessed Virgin never sinned either mortally or venially: Song 4: "You are all beautiful, my beloved," etc. And therefore he says, "It shall not be moved," not even by venial sin. And therefore he says, "God will help it in the morning, at daybreak," that is, while she was still in the womb. And this is what he says, that the Lord aided her at the very break of morning.

[87247] "The nations were troubled." Above, the Psalmist set forth the affliction of others and his own consolation under a likeness; here, however, he explains: first, what was said about the affliction; second, about the consolation, at "The Lord of hosts." And he explains everything in order. Speaking above of tribulation, he says "They roared and were troubled," where he touched upon the disturbance and its cause, "in strength." Also the disturbance of the waters; and he explains when he says, "The nations were troubled": Rev. 17: "The many waters are many peoples." "They were troubled" -- in evil, because they raged against Christ. Or in good, because one who is converted to good feels affliction on account of past habit. Likewise, "The mountains were troubled." And he says, "The kingdoms were brought low," that is, the kings of the earth were humbled to the faith of Christ: Is. 49: "With their face to the ground they will worship you." And he explains the cause when he says, "He uttered his voice." Above he said, "In strength." But in the Old Testament he says "He uttered his voice" through the prophets, and afterward through himself. Ps. 17: "He thundered from heaven," etc. Song 2: "Let your voice sound in my ears." At this voice, "the earth was moved": first of Judea, then the whole earth universally: Is. 24: "The earth shall be moved with moving." Some, however, were moved to evil by the voice of Christ, like the Pharisees and many others. Some to good, like the apostles and those who were converted to the faith.

[87248] "The Lord of hosts." Here he explains what he said about the consolation, namely what he said: "God is in the midst of it." And he describes God who helps, both his presence and his assistance. He describes God in two ways: because he is "the Lord of hosts," since he rules not only lower creatures but also the heavenly powers. It was not sufficient for man that angels be sent, whom he sent for the giving of the old covenant; but it was necessary that he himself come, so that it might be known that the human soul is of such great excellence that it can be made blessed only in the God of hosts: Ps. 79: "Lord of hosts, look and see," etc. And he is with us, first through the likeness of the flesh: Phil. 2: "Made in the likeness of men." Also through familiar conversation: Bar. 3: "After this he was seen on earth," etc. Also through grace, dwelling in us: Eph. 3: "That Christ may dwell through faith," etc. And therefore he is called Emmanuel, that is, "God with us." "The God of Jacob is our protector." Here he shows the help he has from God, because God himself is "our protector, who has taken us into his care": Ps. 3: "But you, O Lord, are my protector." Or he shows how God is with us, namely, because he took on our nature: Heb. 2: "He never takes hold of angels, but of the seed of Abraham." Therefore he is called "the God of Jacob." He is called "God of hosts" on account of the Gentiles, lest they believe that we do not have a different God than they: Heb. 2: "He is not ashamed to call them brothers, saying: I will declare your name to my brothers; in the midst of the Church I will praise you" (Ps. 21).

[87249] "Come and see the works." Here he expresses the tranquility that follows, and he does three things. First, he arouses attention. Second, he proposes the tranquility. And third, he draws a conclusion. First, therefore, he leads into a consideration of the divine works; and so he says, "Come" through faith: 2 Cor. 5: "We walk by faith." "And see," through study and diligence: Mt. 11: "Come to me, all of you," etc. "And see," that is, consider, "the works of the Lord": Is. 5: "You have not considered the work of the Lord." It is said to sinners, Ps. 138: "Your works are wonderful," etc. "What wonders he has set upon the earth." These works are wonders that portend something in the future. And the marvels that occurred in the time of Christ, whether around the death of Christ or in his life -- all were signs of something future. And they are "upon the earth," that is, beyond all natural power. And he shows what they are: "Removing wars." First was the work of peace. Second, he shows the greatness of this work. Third, its usefulness. He "removed wars," because at the time of Christ's birth there was peace in the whole world: Ps. 71: "In his days justice shall arise, and abundance of peace": Ps. 75: "There he broke the powers." And these signified the peace that Christ came to make between God and human nature. The greatness of the peace is shown as to place, because "to the end of the earth," since there was almost universal peace. Literally, at the time of Christ's birth, because with the civil wars already having ceased, Octavian ruled the whole world. And this peace foreshadowed that the peace of Christ was to be extended to all people. Lk. 2: "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace to men." Second, as to time, because it was lasting. And he describes this duration: because if a person fears war, he preserves his weapons. And therefore he says, "He will shatter the bow and break the weapons." As if to say: the peace will last so long that all will consign their weapons to oblivion, because that peace will endure a long time: Is. 2: "They shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks." And he describes weapons of attack that strike from afar; hence he says, "He will shatter the bow": Hos. 1: "I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel." And sometimes from close range -- and this is the sword and the lance. Likewise he describes weapons of defense, because "He will burn the shields with fire." And these signified the perpetuity of the peace to be made by Christ: Is. 9: "His dominion shall be multiplied, and of peace there shall be no end." "He will shatter the bow," that is, deceitful machinations: Ps. 36: "Let their bow be broken." "And he will break the weapons," that is, open attacks: Lk. 11: "When a strong man fully armed," etc. "And he will burn the shields with fire," that is, the defenses of obstinate minds, by which they strive to resist the divine will: Job 41: "His body is like molten shields, pressed together with overlapping scales." These he will burn with the fire of the Holy Spirit, which dissolves the hardness of hearts: Lk. 12: "I have come to cast fire upon the earth."

[87250] "Be still and see." Here is the end of peace. The end of temporal peace, according to the Philosopher, is the contemplation of truth. Hence peace is the useful end of the active life, and peace is ordered to contemplation. And according to Augustine, Christ procured the peace of the Roman Empire so that the apostles might travel throughout the whole world. And therefore he says, since there is such great peace, "Be still and see." Whence it is clear that God gives peace not so that people may be occupied with evil works, but with the contemplation of truth: 1 Cor. 7: "That you may be free for prayer": Sir. 39: "He will be occupied with the prophets." "See," says two things. First, that Christ is true God. Second, that his faith ought to be spread throughout the whole world. As to the first, he says that he is God: Deut. 32: "See that I alone am, and there is no other besides me." As to the second, "I will be exalted among the nations," that is, I will be shown to be exalted in the faith of the nations: Mal. 1: "From the rising of the sun," etc. And he repeats this: "I will be exalted in the earth," namely of the Jews, which is called "earth" on account of its stability: Rom. 11: "Until the fullness of the nations has entered, and so all Israel will be saved." From these things he shows the greatness of God, when he says, "The Lord of hosts is with us." As if to say: by these great works of God shown at that time, we can say that the Lord of hosts is with us. And this has been explained above.
