Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 12
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 12

[86875] In the preceding Psalm the Psalmist set forth the stratagems of his adversaries; here he asks a remedy against them from God. The title: "unto the end, a Psalm of David." This has been explained above. This Psalm is divided into three parts. In the first, a complaint is set forth; in the second, a petition, at "look upon me and hear me"; in the third, the hearing of the prayer, at "but I have trusted in your mercy." The complaint contains three things. He marvels at God's seeming indifference; he confesses his own weakness; and he complains about the power of his adversaries. The second, at "how long"; the third, at "how long shall my enemy be exalted." One who overlooks injuries done to someone does so either because he does not remember him, or because he does not wish to provide a remedy. And so he says: Lord, I am burdened by adversaries, and you do not provide a remedy? "How long will you forget me unto the end?" -- that is, it seems as though you wish finally to shun me. Is. 49: "Zion said, the Lord has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me." Hab. 1: "Why do you not look upon those who act unjustly, and are silent when the wicked devours one more just than himself?" "How long do you turn your face from me?" One turns one's face when one does not provide a remedy. Ps. 43: "Why do you turn away your face? Do you forget our need and our tribulation?" This accords with the history of David, who was long persecuted by Saul. Allegorically, it is said of the fathers of the Old Testament, who continually awaited Christ, and God, as though forgetful of them, delayed in providing a remedy; and they say, "how long, O Lord," etc. "How long do you turn your face from me?" -- that is, the presence of your Son from us. Or, let it be the complaint of modern just persons about the delay of the second coming: "How long, O Lord, will you forget me? Will this be until the end," that is, on the day of judgment, or until death? "And how long do you turn your face from me?" -- that is, the face of your glory, so that I may see you face to face. Ex. 33: "Show me your face." Ps. 79: "Show your face, and we shall be saved." Yet many reasons can also be assigned for why the ancient fathers so greatly desired the coming of Christ in the flesh. The first, on account of the exaltation of human nature, in whose person it is said in Lam. 1: "Look, O Lord, for I have become vile." But it was exalted through the incarnation. Ps. 72: "With glory you have received me," that is, I have been made glorious, as a lowborn woman is elevated if she contracts marriage with a nobleman. Hence it is that every sin after the coming of the Savior is graver than it was before -- just as if a noble woman or man were to commit some shameful act, it would be more disgraceful than if a peasant did so. The second reason is so that the captives might be freed from the prison of Hell or Limbo. Job 17: "Into the deepest Hell shall my bones descend; do you think that at least there shall be rest for me there?" As if to say: no; but through Christ we have been freed from it. Zech. 9: "You also, by the blood of your covenant, have sent forth the prisoner out of the pit in which there was no water." Third, on account of the casting down of the Devil. Ps. 88: "You have humbled the proud one as one who is wounded," that is, you have diminished his power. Fourth, because through the coming of Christ, God has been reconciled to us. Eph. 2: "The cornerstone who makes both one." Fifth, on account of the delight they hoped to have with Christ, by seeing, hearing, and conversing with Him. Mt. 13: "Blessed are the eyes that see what you see," etc. But the moderns desire the second coming. First, because then we shall be exalted. Wis. 3: "The saints shall judge nations and shall rule over peoples." And again, Wis. 5: "They are counted among the children of God." Second, because we shall be freed from every punishment. Is. 25: "The Lord shall wipe away every tear from every face," that is, the cause of weeping, or punishment. Third, because we shall be freed from every sin. Is. 25: "The Lord shall take away the reproach of His people from the whole earth." Fourth, because then we shall be snatched from the power of the Devil. Is. 11: "They shall not hurt nor kill in all my holy mountain." Fifth, because we shall be freed from the servitude of the body. Ps. 141: "Bring my soul out of prison." Rom. 8: "The creature itself shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption." Sixth, because we shall see God face to face. 1 Jn. 3: "We know that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, because we shall see Him as He is." Jer. 31: "All shall know me, from the least even to the greatest." Or it can be the complaint of any just person oppressed by adversity or by the corruption of sin and concupiscence.

[86876] Here he confesses his own weakness, and concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the anxiety of the heart. Second, the resulting sorrow, at "sorrow in my heart by day." As to the first, the Philosopher says in the Rhetoric that fear makes men inclined to take counsel. The same is found in Is. 16: "Enter into counsel, call a council." Thus a man in adversity and temptation sometimes deliberates how to resist; and so he says, "How long shall I take counsel in my soul?" -- that is, how long must I have new plans for resisting enemies? Thus the fathers of the Old Testament had various counsels to prefigure Christ. Now when a man in his deliberation takes one path and yet fails in it, sorrow follows; and so it is said: "How long, O Lord, shall I take counsel in my heart?" -- that is, daily, since I continually fail. Jer. 8: "Sorrow upon sorrow; within me, my heart grieves."

[86877] Here he complains of the prosperity of his enemy, who "shall be exalted," namely Saul over David, and the enemy who leads into consent to sin, and the flesh, since they have their concupiscences. Hab. 1: "Therefore judgment does not come to the end, because the wicked prevails against the just."

[86878] The second part of this Psalm sets forth the prayer or petition. And first the petition is set forth corresponding to God's seeming indifference. Second, to his own weakness, at "enlighten my eyes," etc. Third, to the prosperity of his enemies, at "lest my enemy say," etc. First he speaks of God's seeming indifference through forgetfulness and turning away. As if to say: "look upon me," that is, turn toward me, you who turn away when you have forgotten. "Now hear me." Is. 64: "Look upon us; we are all your people." Second, the petition corresponding to his own weakness is set forth. One petition arises from the many counsels, and another from his sorrows. And so, because I do not have counsels from myself, "enlighten my eyes, lest I sleep in death," that is, teach me. Likewise, Lk. 1: "To enlighten those who sit in darkness," etc. This fits literally with David fleeing from the face of Saul, whom he often had to take care to avoid, lest at some point he fall into his hands and be killed. Similarly, as long as a man is careful to resist sin, he does not fall into death; but when he sleeps, he is slain. Thus, 2 Sam.: when Ishbosheth was sleeping and the maidservant was cleaning wheat, he was killed. Eph. 5: "Rise, you who sleep." The petition against the adversary: "lest my enemy say." And he sets forth two things. First, the petition. Second, its reason, at "those who trouble me." "Enlighten me, lest my enemy say," exultantly: "I have prevailed against him." And the Devil exults when he tempts and draws one into sin. Likewise: "Arise, O Lord, let not man prevail." And the nature of this is that they would rejoice, "because they will exult if I am moved," that is, if I abandon the state of justice and fall into sin. Sir. 18: "Go not after the lusts of your heart, and turn away from your own will. If you grant to your soul her concupiscences, she will make you the joy of your enemies." Dan. 9: "For your own sake, O God, incline your ear and hear; open your eyes and see our desolation, and the city upon which your name is invoked."

[86879] Here the hearing of his prayer is signified, and concerning this he does three things. First he sets forth the hope of being heard. Second, the joy over being heard, at "and my heart shall rejoice." Third, he gives thanks, at "I will sing." He says therefore, "in your mercy I have hoped," not in the world. Lam. 3: "The mercies of the Lord are many, because we are not consumed." Not in my own power, because it is nothing against the Devil. Job 41: "There is no power on earth that can be compared to him." And he sets forth here three things by which a man is helped against the Devil: namely, through spiritual joy, through devout prayer, and through good works. On account of the first he says, "My heart shall rejoice in your salvation," not in temporal things or vanities, as sinners do, of whom Job 21 says: "They rejoice at the sound of the organ, and spend their days in prosperity, and in a moment they go down to Hell." Hos. 9: "Do not rejoice, O Israel; do not exult like the peoples." But "in your salvation," that is, in Christ, who came for this purpose, to save us. Mt. 1: "For He shall save," etc. And this joy arms a man against the Devil. Prov. 17: "A joyful mind makes for a flourishing age; a sorrowful spirit dries up the bones." The second is prayer or the praise of God; hence he adds, "I will sing to the Lord," that is, I will praise Him. Ps. 21: "You who fear the Lord, praise Him." For the praise of God avails greatly for vanquishing the Devil. Mt. 17: "This kind of demon is not cast out except by prayer and fasting." Hab. 3: "But I will rejoice in the Lord, and I will exult in God my Jesus." And this for benefits received; and so there follows, "who has bestowed good things on me," that is, who bestows good things. Jas. 1: "Every best gift," etc. And he says "good things," because there are certain temporal goods that the Lord bestows. Mt. 25: "He delivered to them his goods, and to one he gave five talents," etc. Likewise, spiritual goods, which are the goods of grace and virtues. 1 Cor. 12: "There are diversities of graces," etc. "All these things one and the same Spirit works, dividing to each one as He wills." Job 2: "If we have received good things from the hand of the Lord," etc. Likewise, the goods of glory. Ps. 26: "I believe that I shall see the good things of the Lord in the land of the living." All these good things the Lord bestows; and therefore He is rightly to be praised. Sir. 51: "To Him who gives me wisdom I will give glory." The third is good work, of which is added, "I will play," that is, I will work. To play the psaltery is to strike it with the hand. Jerome: "Always be doing something good, so that the Devil may find you occupied." Mt. 12: "When the unclean spirit goes out of a man," etc., "they enter and dwell there," etc. "And they become," etc. "To the name of the Lord," that is, for the praise of the name of the Lord Most High. Lk. 2: "Glory to God in the highest." Mt. 5: "So let your light shine before men, that they may see," etc.
