Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 29
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 29

[87046] In the preceding Psalm the prophet exhorted others to give thanks; here he himself gives thanks. The title is "A Psalm of a canticle, at the dedication of the house of David." As was said above, Psalms of canticles are so called because first a canticle was sung, and afterward followed the Psalm: as it were, a Psalm following a canticle. But we read that David did not dedicate a house to God, because he was forbidden by Nathan from the Lord, 2 Kgs. 7. But here it does not say "the house of the Lord," but "of David." We read in 2 Kgs. 5 that after the death of Saul he took Jerusalem, and there built his house. And it is customary that when someone enters a house, he holds a celebration. And it could be said that this Psalm was then sung by David himself, when he first entered that new house to dwell there. Yet it is better understood as referring to the mystery of the house of David, that is, of Christ, who is the head and the body of the Church. And this same house is called a tabernacle. Above it said "for the completion of the tabernacle"; here, however, "at the dedication of the house." A tabernacle belongs to those who are on campaign: and so the present Church is called a tabernacle. Rev. 21: "Behold the tabernacle of God with men," etc. A house belongs to those who are at rest: so the Church awaits the rest of the fatherland: Ps. 121: "We shall go into the house of the Lord." Both of these have a construction, which was in the ordaining of his incarnation: and a dedication, which was in the resurrection, when the body of Christ was clothed with the glory of immortality. Upon the body of Christ the building continues; and through the conversion of the faithful it will be dedicated when it shall be in glory. This Psalm is divided into two parts. In the first he commemorates in general the benefits for which he gives thanks. In the second, in particular, at "But I said." Concerning the first he does two things. First he gives thanks for his own benefits. Second he invites others to give thanks for the common benefits, at "Sing to the Lord, you his saints." Concerning the first he does three things. First he sets forth his thanksgiving. Second he commemorates the benefits, at "Because you have taken me up." Third he explains, at "O Lord my God." He says therefore: "O Lord, I will exalt you," not by making you higher, but by confessing and praising your height: Sir. 43: "Blessing the Lord, exalt him as much as you can." And he assigns two benefits as reasons why he exalts: one on the part of God, and another on the part of the enemies: and the second is the effect of the first. On the part of God: "Because you have taken me up" into your protection, when he chose him and protected him, as is found in 1 Kgs. 16, to the end. Or God takes up the just when he unites them to himself, who through the union of charity cling to him. But he united Christ the man to himself by taking him up into a perfect unity: Ps. 3: "But you, O Lord, are my protector," etc. On the part of the enemies: "Because you have not let them rejoice." For it is not very hateful that enemies should rejoice over someone; because they do not rejoice except over his misfortune, and no one wishes evil except upon one whom he detests: Sir. 18: "If you yield to your soul its desires, it will make you a joy to your enemies." But it is certain that David did not become a joy to his enemies, because Saul did not achieve his purpose against him. But concerning Christ this does not seem to hold: Mt. 27: for they mocked him already crucified: "Ha! You who would destroy the temple of God," etc. Likewise, the wicked also mock just men and rejoice over them: Job 30: "Those younger than I deride me; now I am turned into their song and have become a proverb to them." But it must be said that if for an hour the Jews rejoiced over Christ, they did not do so finally: because when Christ rose, his name prevailed all the more: Mic. 7: "Do not rejoice over me, O my enemy, because I have fallen; I shall rise again."

[87047] Then when he says "O Lord my God," he shows how he was delivered. And first from interior evils. Second from exterior evils, at "O Lord, you have brought up." The interior evil is infirmity, either bodily or spiritual. Both of these could exist in David and in us, but in Christ only bodily, on account of his passibility: and therefore he says, "I cried out," namely David: Ps. 119: "To the Lord, when I was in trouble, I cried out." Likewise Christ cried out, even though insofar as he is God he is the one who hears: Heb. 5: "With a strong cry and tears," etc. There follows, "And you healed me." He says that he was healed from both kinds of infirmity; but God healed Christ from bodily passibility alone. Next he says he was delivered from exterior evils: "O Lord, you have brought up." And first from those that were imminent. Second from those from which he was preserved, at "You have saved." He says therefore, "O Lord, you have brought up," etc. This cannot be understood literally of David: because he was not rescued from hell when he composed this Psalm. It can be understood of him metaphorically, as though he were delivered from mortal danger. But literally it is understood of Christ, whose soul was brought up from hell by God: Ps. 15: "Do not abandon my soul in hell." Likewise it applies to those who were raised through Christ: Zech. 9: "You also, by the blood of your covenant, have sent forth your captives out of the pit in which there was no water." Second he says he was preserved from mortal danger, when he adds, "You have saved me from those who go down into the pit." Literally, the pit is taken for a cavity: for it was the custom of the ancients that they were buried in deep cavities. "You have saved me," he says, "from those who go down into the pit"; as if to say, you have delivered me from the dangers of death. But concerning Christ the explanation is most fitting, because by the pit is understood eternal damnation: for although Christ descended into hell, he did not descend there as unto damnation, but to free those who were in the pit; as if to say, you have granted me that I should not be made like those who go down into the pit: Ps. 87: "I have become as a man without help, free among the dead." Or "into the pit," that is, into sin; for he was immune from sin.

[87048] Then when he says, "Sing to the Lord, you his saints," etc., he induces others first to give thanks. Second he commemorates the benefits, at "For there is wrath in his indignation." Where he does two things: first he shows who those are that owe thanks to God. Second, for what, at "Give thanks." He says therefore: "Sing." Behold how it is a Psalm of a canticle. "Sing," I say, "you saints": because Sir. 15: "Praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner": Rev. 19: "Give praise to our God, all you his saints." But for what? "Give thanks," in thanksgiving, "to the memory of his holiness." In one way, "memory" can be understood as meaning that God is mindful of us: Jer. 2: "I have remembered you," etc. And he says "of his holiness." And this can be understood in two ways: either because this memory proceeds from his holiness, that is, from his mercy and goodness: Lev. 11: "Be holy, because I am holy": or because he is mindful of us in order to sanctify us: Lev. 20: "I am the Lord who sanctifies you." In another way, "memory" refers to our own memory, because we remember the holiness of God; as if to say: give thanks by commemorating his holiness: Is. 63: "I will remember the mercies of the Lord."

[87049] Second, when he says "For there is wrath," he commemorates the benefits shown to all. Where he does two things. First he proposes these benefits, which pertain to the clemency of God. Second he shows a sign of his clemency, at "In the evening." He says therefore, "For there is wrath," etc. The mercy of God is not without justice; therefore he first sets forth justice. Second, mercy: justice, when he says, "For there is wrath." Here "wrath" is taken for the effect of wrath, that is, for vengeance; "indignation" however, not for a stirring of anger in God, but for the justice of God, according to which he detests the wicked: because Wis. 14: "The wicked man and his wickedness are alike hateful to God"; as if to say: "in his indignation," that is, in the justice of God judging sins, there is "wrath," that is, vengeance. Jerome more plainly: "For his wrath is but for a moment"; as if to say, if at any time he is angry with his own, this is for correction and for a short time: Is. 54: "In a moment of indignation I hid myself," etc. Ezek. 18: "I do not will the death of the sinner who dies." Jerome: "There is life in his favor"; as if to say, he punishes for a moment, and afterward is reconciled and restores life: Job 5: "He strikes, and his hands heal." He shows the sign of his clemency and mercy according to the letter when he adds, "In the evening weeping shall have place"; as if to say: in a short time the Lord leads from sadness to consolation: because if anyone is sad in the evening, in the morning he shall be joyful. A threefold reason can be assigned as to why sadness comes in the evening and joy in the morning. One is from exterior disposition: because the evening is the beginning of darkness, which causes sorrow; but the morning is the beginning of light, which brings joy: hence the blind sing so that they may be cheered: Tob. 5: "What joy shall be mine, who sit in darkness and do not see the light of heaven?" Second, from interior disposition: the morning is the hour of the blood, at which a man is disposed to joy; the evening is the hour of melancholy, at which a man is disposed to sadness. Third, from the nature of sleep. For sleep is the rest of animals: hence sadness is quieted through sleep. Mystically the text is clear: because in the evening of the Lord's burial there was sadness, because the faithful were still weeping over the death of Christ. But at the morning, on account of the news of the resurrection, there was joy. If it is referred to the whole human race, then "in the evening," that is, at the sin of the first parent, there was sadness; because, as is found in Gen. 3, after midday, with the sun already inclining toward its setting, Adam sinned. And this weeping cannot be called brief, because even after the restoration of grace its traces remain. But "in the morning," that is, in Christ, there was joy. Or "in the evening," when the spiritual light begins to fail in a man, then there is weeping in him; but when it shines again in him, then there is joy: Ps. 5: "In the morning I shall stand before you and see."

[87050] "But I said, in my abundance." Above he gave thanks for the divine benefits; here he pursues the whole order of how he obtained this. Where he does three things. First he sets forth the process of his direction. Second, his recourse to prayer, at "To you, O Lord, I will cry out." Third he shows the hearing of his prayer, at "The Lord has heard." According to the Gloss, the first things are understood of Christ and of every man. And first let us explain how they are understood of every man: Sir. 10: "The beginning of all sin is pride." And therefore in the process of direction, first the presumption of those who trust in themselves is set forth. Second, the falsity of the presumption, at "O Lord, in your will." Third, the punishment of the presumption, at "You turned your face away from me." He says therefore: "I said," that is, I presumed in my heart, "in my abundance" of bodily prosperity, "I shall not be moved," that is, I shall not fail: Rev. 18: "I sit as a queen," etc. Sir. 11: "In the day of good things, do not be unmindful," etc. Or "in my abundance" of spiritual goods, as Adam was in Paradise: Ezek. 28: "Full of wisdom, perfect in beauty, in delights." And in this abundance they say, "I shall not be moved." Against which it is said in 1 Cor. 10: "He who thinks he stands, let him take heed lest he fall." He shows the falsity of the presumption when he says, "O Lord, in your will," etc. The beauty of man temporally is temporal prosperity: therefore it is compared to a flower: Is. 40: "All flesh is grass." But this beauty does not have power to endure of its own nature, as is said in Jas. 1: "Like the flower of the grass it shall pass away. For the sun rose with its burning heat and dried the grass, and its flower fell, and the beauty of its countenance perished: so also shall the rich man," etc. But from where does it have power and firmness and constancy? Certainly from the will of God. And therefore I said, but presumptuously, "I shall not be moved." But it is not so; rather, as long as it pleased you, you gave strength to my beauty. Indeed in perpetuity, because these things are eternal for the saints in the fatherland; but here, at his will. Likewise beauty can be taken for spiritual virtue: Prov. 31: "Strength and beauty," etc. This also of its own nature is not strong: because we have this beauty in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4; Lk. 24: "Stay in the city, until you are clothed with power from on high." And therefore he says, "You gave strength to my beauty, but in your will": Rom. 9: "He has mercy on whom he will." And he proves this by the effect: because "when you turned your face from me, I perished." God is said to turn his face from a man so as not to see him, or so as not to be seen by him. He sees all with a simple vision and knowledge; but some he sees with a vision of mercy: Ps. 24: "Look upon me, and have mercy on me." "You turned your face from me," therefore, so as not to have mercy on me. And immediately "I was troubled," either spiritually by falling into sin, or temporally into adversity. Or "you turned your face," so as not to be seen by me. And this seems to be the sense of Jerome's text. In any adversity whatsoever, the strength of man is to have his eyes fixed on God: Ps. 76: "I remembered God, and was delighted." "You turned away," therefore, so that I might not see. "And I was troubled." But if it is explained of Christ, then in this, "I said," not indeed presumptuously but with the certainty of knowledge, "in my abundance," that is, of virtues and graces: Jn. 1: "We saw his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father." "I shall not be moved" from the will of God: Jn. 8: "I always do the things that are pleasing to him." And this because "you gave strength to my beauty," namely, of working miracles and of resisting adversaries: Rom. 1: "He was predestined as the Son of God in power." And this is clear: because "when you turned your face from me" in the passion: Ps. 21: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" "I was troubled," not in reason but in sensuality: Jn. 12: "Now my soul is troubled."

[87051] "To you." Next he turns to prayer, when he says, "To you, O Lord, I will cry out," etc. And first he sets forth the prayer. Second he assigns the reason, at "What profit." Third he shows that the prayer was heard, at "The Lord has heard." Concerning the first he does two things. First he prays for the removal of evil. Second, for the attainment of good, at "And to my God I will make supplication." He says therefore, "To you, O Lord, I will cry out," so that the cry is understood as prayer made for the removal of evil -- in Christ, of the passion; in the sinner, of sin; in the afflicted man, of adversity. "And to my God I will make supplication." Supplication is for the good to be given: to Christ, namely glory; to the sinner, grace; to the afflicted man, prosperity. Or the cry may refer to the affliction of the heart, and the supplication to the persistence of prayer: Jas. 5: "The persistent supplication of a just man avails much."

[87052] Then when he says, "What profit is there in my blood." He assigns the reason in two ways. First in general. Second in particular, at "Shall the dust confess." He says therefore, "What profit?" If it is explained of Christ, in the blood of Christ there was the greatest profit: Mt. 26: "It shall be shed for many for the remission of sins." But if he had not been raised quickly, and his resurrection had been delayed until the end of the world, there would have been no profit in it; or even if his body had been totally corrupted. But was the passion sufficient for salvation? Yes. But if this had not been the case, namely that he had not risen, and risen quickly, his divinity would not have been believed: and so men would not have obtained the profit. In particular he shows this, saying, "Shall the dust confess to you." Dust is spoken of in two ways. In one way, it refers to the dust of sinners: Ps. 1: "Like the dust which the wind casts from the face of the earth." Through the death of Christ, sinners, who are dust, arrived after the resurrection at two goods: namely, that they might confess their sins: Acts 2: "Hearing these things, they were pierced in heart," etc. And therefore he says, "Shall the dust confess to you?" Namely, the sinner, if I go down into the corruption of decay; as if to say, no. The other good is the confession of the truth of faith; hence, "Or shall it announce your truth?" Or shall the dust dissolved from the body now be the matter by which through the apostles peoples confess to you the truth, or the apostles themselves announce your truth? If it is explained of man, then thus: "Shall it confess," that is, if I die, I shall not be able to praise you.

[87053] Third, when he says "The Lord has heard." He shows that the prayer was heard. And first the hearing is set forth. Second, the manner of the hearing, at "And he had mercy." Third, the fruit, at "That my glory may sing." He says therefore, "The Lord has heard," etc. He had said above, "I will cry out"; here he says he was heard, for the Lord heard, because he answered: Is. 65: "And it shall be that before they call, I will hear; while they are yet speaking, I will listen": Jn. 11: "Father, I thank you that you have heard me: but I knew that you always hear me." Then the manner is set forth: "And he had mercy on me." And first he shows the manner itself. Second he explains it, at "You have turned," etc. The Gloss says: "I will cry out" against evils, "and I will make supplication" for goods; and in both I was heard. For as to the first, "he had mercy on me," removing every evil of suffering. As to the second, "the Lord became my helper." And that I obtained the glory of immortality: Ps. 27: "My helper and my protector; in him my heart has hoped, and I have been heard. And my flesh has flourished." He explains the manner when he says, "You have turned." Insofar as he speaks of Christ, he says two things. For first he shows the change from evils to good, as to interior things. Second, as to exterior things, at "You have torn." Christ had mourning at the time of the passion in himself: because "My soul is sorrowful," etc. Mt. 26. And in his own: Jn. 16: "Because you shall weep and lament," etc. "You have turned this mourning," he says, "into the joy" of the resurrection. As to himself: Ps. 20: "O Lord, in your strength the king shall rejoice," namely Christ. As to his own: because "the disciples rejoiced seeing the Lord," Jn. 20. Second he shows the change made from evils to goods, as to exterior things: "because you have torn." A sackcloth is a rough garment, and it is placed upon the loins in time of sadness, and it is made from goat hair. So the sackcloth is the flesh of Christ insofar as it bears the likeness of sinful flesh. For goats and kids signify sinners: because they were offered for sins, as is found in the Gloss. "You have torn my sackcloth," that is, you allowed it to be rent by nails and lance, and you have restored immortality to me: and therefore he says "you have surrounded me." Or it can be understood of any just person, that mourning is changed into joy: Jn. 16: "Your sorrow shall be turned into joy": Tob. 3: "After lamentation and weeping you pour forth exultation."

[87054] Then when he says, "That my glory may sing," the fruit of the hearing is set forth. The fruit is the glory of God; and that it may redound to the glory of God can be understood in two ways: either of the glory of the resurrection of Christ, or of the glory of the saints; hence he says, "My glory," given to me in the resurrection, or to be given to the saints in the fatherland, "may sing to you," that is, may be your praise: Jn. 17: "That your Son may glorify you"; and let this be in perpetuity; hence he says, "O Lord my God, forever I shall confess to you": Ps. 83: "Blessed are those who dwell in your house: they shall praise you forever and ever."