Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 22
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 22

[86986] Above, the Psalmist, speaking in the person of Christ, spoke much of his tribulation; here he speaks of the remedy by which he is sustained in it. And first he commemorates the benefits by which he is sustained. Second, the power of that sustaining, at "the earth is the Lord's." This Psalm does not have a new title, but seems to designate certain persons walking on a journey. Hence it can signify the return of the people from Babylon, and it signifies the return of Christ from the world to heaven. Concerning this he does two things. First he commemorates past benefits. Second, he commemorates future benefits, at "and your mercy." Concerning the first he does two things. First he commemorates benefits that consist in the consolation of good things. Second, those that consist in help against evils, at "for even though I should walk." Concerning the first he touches on three things. First he commemorates the sufficiency of the divine promise. Second, its abundance, at "in a place of pasture." Third, its effects, at "He has converted my soul." He sets forth therefore, first, the divine provision; hence he says, "the Lord rules me." Jerome: "the Lord feeds me." And it is the same thing, because he who feeds, rules. And it is understood as said in the person of the Church, concerning Christ, who is our shepherd. Jn. 10: "I am the good shepherd." Mt. 6: "Behold the birds of the air," etc., because God is said to be our shepherd, for He feeds even the birds of the air, as was said. Mic. 7: "Feed your people with your rod, the flock of your inheritance." Rom. 15: "He who shall rise up to rule the nations." And He feeds sufficiently; hence he says, "nothing shall be wanting to me" -- namely, of what is necessary for salvation. And in temporal things: Lk. 22: "When I sent you without purse or scrip," etc., "did you lack anything?" etc. Mt. 6: "Seek first the kingdom of God, and all these things shall be added unto you." And in the future we shall have all sufficiency, because nothing shall be wanting to us, since we shall have God. He designates all abundance metaphorically through the abundance of food and drink. For if He feeds us, He stands in relation to us as a shepherd to his sheep, which are nourished by two things, namely grass and water. With regard to the first he says, "in a place of pasture there He has placed me," that is, a place of grazing, where there is an abundance of grasses. This abundance consists in the sacred teachings of divine Scripture and in the abundance of spiritual things. Ezek. 34: "They shall feed on green pastures and in rich meadows." With regard to the second he says, "beside the water of refreshment He has led me forth." And he says "He has placed me," because the divine word does two things: namely, it instructs beginners and confirms the advanced. On account of the first he says, "in a place of pasture." On account of the second he says, "there He has placed me." With regard to the second he says, "beside the water of refreshment He has led me forth." This is the water of Baptism. Ezek. 36: "I will pour out clean water upon you," etc. Or it is the water of the wisdom of sacred doctrine, which is both food, because it strengthens, and water, because it refreshes. Sir. 15: "She gave him the water of wholesome wisdom to drink." "He has converted my soul." This is the effect of the pasture, because "He has converted my soul." Or he says what these pastures are: namely, the conversion of the soul. Now there is a twofold effect of spiritual doctrine. The first is interior, in the conversion of the soul to God, when it completely withdraws itself from the things of the world. Ps. 18: "The law of the Lord is undefiled, converting souls; the testimony," etc. And the conversion is accomplished by the power of God. Lam. 5: "Convert us, O Lord, to yourself." The other effect is exterior, that one may carry out outward works; hence he says: "He has led me along the paths of justice." These are good works. Is. 40: "Make straight the paths of our God." Or the paths are the counsels. Prov. 4: "I will lead you through the paths of equity." And this, "for the sake of your name," that is, for the glory of your name. Ps. 43: "For the glory of your name, deliver us."

[86987] "For." Here he sets forth the benefits against evils. And first in general; second, in particular, at "your rod." And he speaks after the likeness of a man going through dangerous places, for whom security is necessary. And he sets forth these benefits here: "for even though I should walk in the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evils, because you are with me" -- as a guide and protector. And thus I shall be secure. The shadow of death is called the present tribulation; for a shadow is the portent of a body that follows. Col. 2: "The law is a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ's." Thus tribulation is, as it were, an indication of death. "In the midst," that is, in the depth or intensity of tribulation. Ps. 137: "If I shall walk in the midst of tribulation, you will revive me," etc. But the shadow of death is also called the present life, dark with the gloom of sins. Job 3: "Let darkness seize upon it," etc. Or the shadow of death is called the deeds of heretics bearing within themselves the image of the Devil. Job 28: "The torrent divides the stone of darkness and the shadow of death," etc. Now it is called the shadow of death because it does not inflict harm when God is present. Job 17: "Set me beside you," etc. Is. 43: "When you pass through the waters, I will be with you, lest the rivers overwhelm you; when you walk through fire, you shall not be burned." But beyond this security, he sets forth three benefits that God bestows in these circumstances. First, He sustains; hence he says, "your rod and your staff." And this can be understood in two ways. In one way, so that by the rod we understand the direction of the way. Ps. 44: "The rod of direction is the rod of your kingdom." By the staff we understand a support. Tob. 5: "The staff of our old age." Jerome's text has "a prop." As if to say: the showing of the way and the support itself "have comforted me," that is, they have given me consolation on the way. 2 Cor. 1: "The God of all consolation, who comforts us." In another way, this can be expounded as pertaining to correction, because the rod serves for correction. Prov. 13: "He who spares the rod," etc. "And your staff," namely of senior discipline. As if to say: your gentle and your severe correction have given me consolation. Prov. 3: "Whom He loves He corrects, and as a father He takes delight in his son." With regard to the second he says, "you have prepared a table before me," a table of twofold doctrine. Prov. 9: "She has set forth her table; she has sent her handmaids to call to the tower," where there are diverse courses, namely, diverse spiritual teachings. And this "before me," because he meditates on the law day and night, Ps. 1. Or the sacramental table, namely of the altar. For a threefold table is read of in sacred Scripture. The first is the table of the Old Law. Ex. 25: "You shall make a table of setim wood, and you shall set upon the table the loaves of proposition." Another is of the New Testament. 1 Cor. 10: "You cannot be partakers of the table of the Lord and of the table of demons." And this table was both reality and figure. The third table is in our homeland. Lk. 22: "I dispose to you a kingdom, that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom." And with both tables we fight against our enemies; hence he says, "against those who trouble me." Because through the table that is sacred Scripture, we repel temptations. Eph. 6: "In all things taking up the shield of faith, with which you may be able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the most wicked one." Likewise the body of Christ protects against enemies, as Chrysostom says on John. "You have anointed my head with oil," that is, with gladness. This is signified by two things, namely, oil that anoints and wine that inebriates. And he says this after the likeness of the ancient Orientals, who at feasts used to anoint their heads with oil. Is. 61: "To give them a crown instead of ashes, and the oil of gladness instead of mourning." "My head," that is, Christ, "you have anointed," that is, filled most abundantly with the oil of spiritual grace, so that from Him grace might be diffused to us. 1 Cor. 8: "One Lord Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we through Him." Ps. 44: "He anointed you," etc. Or "my head," that is, my mind. Mt. 6: "But when you fast, anoint your head," that is, your mind, with oil, that is, with spiritual devotion. "And your cup" -- or "my cup," that is, given to me -- or "your cup," that is, given by you. This cup is the gift of divine love which inebriates, because one who is drunk is not in himself, nor does he speak according to himself, but according to the impulse of wine. So one who is full of divine love speaks according to God; for he has been made ecstatic. Song 5: "Eat, friends, and be inebriated." Is. 55: "As the rain and the snow come down from heaven and inebriate the earth and make it bud forth; so shall my word be that goes forth from my mouth." Jer. 23: "I have become like a drunken man, and like a man soaked with wine, before the face of the Lord." Or the cup is called the blood of Christ, because it ought to inebriate. "And how excellent it is," that is, most exceedingly bright. "And your mercy," etc. Here he sets forth future benefits. And first, with regard to participation in divine gifts; second, with regard to the enjoyment of God Himself. He says therefore: you have done all these aforementioned things for me; but I ask that "your mercy may follow me." Elsewhere he asked that it might go before; here, that it might follow. And both are necessary, because the prevenient mercy is necessary because it inspires the mind, and the subsequent helps so that it may take effect. "That I may dwell in the house of the Lord" -- this is the Church -- "for length of days," that is, always through grace, and in heaven through glory. Ps. 26: "One thing I have asked of the Lord," etc. Is. 65: "You shall rejoice and exult forever."
