Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 10
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 10

[86867] In the preceding Psalms, thanksgiving was given for deliverance from enemies; here he shows the confidence conceived from this. And he speaks in the person of a man desiring the benefits of God, who attains security. The title: "unto the end, a Psalm of David." Jerome has: "to the victor." This has been explained above. This Psalm can be expounded literally of David, but mystically of Christ, that is, allegorically. Morally, however, it concerns the just man and heretics, as the Gloss explains. First, then, David proposes his confidence: "in the Lord I trust" -- as one freed through the just judgment of God who casts down sinners and exalts the poor. Jer. 17: "Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, and the Lord shall be his confidence." Dan. 3: "There is no confusion for those who trust in you." Second, he sets forth the attack upon his confidence, which was made by words: "how do you say," etc. For certain people advised David as he was fleeing to go to fortified places and mountains, or to hide there as a sparrow does. "How?" "Behold, sinners," etc. And this is expounded in two ways. First, that these are not the words of David, but of others -- as if to say: therefore flee, because "they have bent the bow." Or they are the words of David, as if to say: "in the Lord I trust," because "they have bent the bow, sinners have prepared their arrows," etc. And he does three things. First he sets forth their wicked scheming. Second, their perverse intention: "to shoot." Third, their unjust action: "because what you have established." Mystically, of Christ, it is thus: I, Christ, trust in the Lord. How then do you Pharisees say, "flee to the mountain," that is, to the observances of the law given on Mount Sinai? Deut. 33: "The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir for us." And unless you do this, behold, sinners have bent the bow, etc. -- that is, they have prepared themselves to kill you and your disciples; and this, "because what you established they have destroyed," that is, they have killed. Or morally, the believer says to heretics, according to the Gloss: "in the Lord I trust," holding His faith. How then do you heretics say, "flee to us, to the mountain," that is, to Christ, whom the heretics believed they possessed? Is. 2: "The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of the mountains." 2 Sam. 1: "O mountains of Gilboa, let neither dew nor rain come upon you, nor fields of first fruits, because there the shield of the mighty was cast away" -- that is, of the Jews, or of the great heretics. Jer. 51: "Behold, I am against you, O destroying mountain, that corrupts the whole earth." Or the mountain signifies the loftiness of understanding which they pretend to have. But if I were to do this, I would be a light sparrow, not one with a permanent dwelling. "Because behold, sinners," that is, heretics, "have bent the bow," that is, they have drawn sacred Scripture to themselves, as those who bend a bow. "They have prepared their arrows" -- poisoned words -- "in the quiver," that is, in their memory or knowledge. Jer. 5: "His quiver is like an open tomb." Jerome has: "their arrows upon the string," that is, the bowstring -- their perverse intention being "to shoot the upright of heart," that is, the just, "in darkness," that is, deceitfully. Jer. 9: "Their tongue is a wounding arrow." Or "in darkness," that is, in the subtleties of sacred Scripture. Another reading has "in the dark moon." The moon is the Church: Song 6: "Beautiful as the moon," on account of her brightness and on account of her darkening. The brightness of the moon is from the sun; so the brightness of the Church is from Christ. Jn. 1: "He was the true light that enlightens," etc. Likewise, half the globe of the moon is bright and half is dark; so in the Church some are bright and some are dark. Now the moon is darkened, according to the Gloss, sometimes by its revolution, and thus it becomes dark; sometimes by eclipse, and then it is turned to blood; sometimes by the interposition of a cloud, and then it becomes black. So the Church becomes dark in its newness, when there are no preachers and teachers in her; blood-red through the persecution of tyrants; black through clouds, that is, through the seduction of heretics -- and then they seek to shoot. Here the unjust action is set forth: "because what you established they have destroyed." Another reading: "because whom you established." But the first is better, and according to Jerome: "because the laws which you established they have destroyed." Is. 48: "I know that you are a thorough transgressor, and I called you a transgressor from the womb." Jer. 2: "Of old you broke your yoke, you burst your bonds; you said, 'I will not serve.'" As if to say: they will destroy your law, which you commanded to be observed. Ex. 23: "The innocent and the just you shall not condemn." But these wish to kill him. Ps. 118: "The wicked have destroyed your law." And God perfected it, because He gave it. Ps. 147: "He has not done in like manner to every nation." Mt. 5: "I have not come to destroy the law, but to fulfill it." If the reading is "whom you established they have destroyed," then it is understood of Christ, "whom you established."

[86868] "The just one." Here the reason for confidence is set forth. And first the question is posed. Second, the solution, at "the Lord is in his holy temple," etc. Third, the reason for the solution: "because the Lord is just, and has loved justice." He says therefore: these are what they do; but what does the just Lord, seeing this with authority, do? Jer. 33: "This is the name they shall call him: the Lord our justice." He resolves the question and sets forth what this just one does. And first, His judicial power, or the condition of the judge. Second, the examination of the judgment: "His eyes." Third, the condemnation of the wicked: "but he who loves." If a judge always punishes, he is cruel; if he always spares, he is lax. But God does both; and therefore He has a place for the tribunal of mercy, and this is the temple. Heb. 4: "Let us draw near with confidence to the throne of grace." And so he says, "the Lord is in his holy temple." 1 Cor. 3: "Do you not know that you are the temple of God, and that the Holy Spirit dwells in you?" He also has a place of justice, from which He punishes, namely heaven; and this is also expressed: "the Lord, his throne is in heaven." Where His power is enumerated. Is. 66: "Heaven is my throne." The faithful are called a temple on account of their devotion; heaven, on account of their wisdom. Likewise heaven is called a cradle in which God sits, so as to make one a heaven, that is, one who knows secrets. Likewise the soul is called the temple of God, because in the temple God is worshiped. Similarly in the faithful soul: Mt. 6: "Enter into your room," that is, the secrets of your soul, "and having shut the door, pray to your Father in secret." Likewise, sacrifices are offered there; similarly in the faithful soul: Ps. 50: "A sacrifice to God is a troubled spirit." Likewise in the temple, prayers are poured out to God; so in the soul God works: Is. 26: "All our works you have wrought in us, O Lord." Likewise, because God sanctifies the soul and descends into it as into a temple: Wis. 4: "The grace of God upon his holy ones, and his regard," etc.

[86869] "His eyes." Here he treats of the examination of the judgment. And first he sets forth the perfection of divine knowledge. Second, the diligent investigation, at "his eyelids question the children of men." Third, the equity of the judgment, at "the Lord examines the just and the wicked." By the first, no one can be hidden, because He sees the sentiment of the poor and the wicked, the sinner and the just. Sir. 23: "The eyes of the Lord are brighter than the sun, surveying all the ways of men, and the depths of the abyss, and beholding the hearts of men." Prov. 16: "All the ways of a man are open to His eyes; the Lord is a weigher of spirits," that is, of thoughts, or of souls, according to the Gloss. And so he says, "His eyes look upon the poor," to have compassion. Ps. 30: "Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am troubled." Likewise Ps. 27: "The Lord is my protector, and in Him my heart has hoped," etc. Also to protect by testing: Ps. 33: "The eyes of the Lord are upon the just." Likewise Ps. 31: "In this way in which you walk, I will fix my eyes upon you." And thus looking, He examines diligently. "His eyelids question," etc. By eyelids is signified discernment, because just as the eyelids direct the gaze of the eye, so discernment moderates human wisdom. Prov. 4: "Let your eyelids go before your steps." The very discernment of God therefore questions, that is, tests and examines. Wis. 1: "There shall be an examination of the thoughts of the ungodly; and the hearing of his words shall come to God." And how? Because sometimes He punishes, sometimes He spares, sometimes He gives benefits, sometimes He takes them away. Job 6: "The arrows of the Lord," etc. He also closes and opens His eyelids: Mt. 15: "I have compassion on the multitude," etc. Likewise, Mt. 21: "The kingdom of God shall be taken from you." Ps. 146: "He gives their food to the beasts," etc. "He questions the children of men," because some of them are made better by this, and some worse; or some from Scripture are made good, and some bad -- because some understand it well and are not wearied but exercised; but the wicked do the contrary. The equity of judgment is set forth: because "He examines the just and the wicked," because He sends afflictions upon the just and unjust alike, and bestows temporal goods on good and bad alike. Wis. 11: "The good you tested as a father admonishing; but the wicked you examined and condemned as a harsh king." Therefore he says, "the Lord examines the just and the wicked," that is, He tests them through tribulations. Gregory: An inflicted punishment questions whether one placed in tribulation truly loves God. The just He examines, that is, the Lord tests them, so they may be rewarded. Wis. 10: "God rendered the reward of the labors of His saints." But the wicked or sinners He examines to be condemned. Mt. 22: "Bind his hands and feet and cast him into the outer darkness."

[86870] Here the condemnation is set forth, and concerning this he does two things: first he sets forth the guilt; second, the punishment, at "he shall rain upon sinners." He shows that as far as God's part is concerned, there is no perdition of the wicked, but it comes from our part; hence he says, "he who loves iniquity," that is, sin. 1 Jn. 3: "Everyone who commits sin commits iniquity also, because sin is iniquity." "He hates his own soul." Wis. 16: "A man by his wickedness kills his own soul." But the question arises: how can someone hate himself? It must be said that in a certain way the sinner hates himself; but simply speaking, no one does. Eph. 5: "No man ever hated his own flesh." But that the wicked in a certain way hate themselves, and that also the good in a certain way hate themselves, is explained as follows. Our soul has two faces: one toward God, according to reason; the other toward the flesh, according to the sensitive nature, which comprehends only corporeal things. And just as every thing loves its own good, so a man loves what he considers to be his soul. For sinners consider their soul to be that which they principally pursue, because everything is that which is preeminent in it, just as the king is said to be the kingdom. Those, therefore, who hold the sensitive nature as principal love it; but those who hold the intellective nature love that. No one therefore hates his soul with regard to what he considers principal. The good therefore hate themselves with regard to the sensitive nature; the wicked, with regard to the intellective nature. Second, he sets forth the punishment. And this we can expound of the present or of the future. Of the present thus, maintaining the metaphor. He said that the Lord is in heaven, because there His throne is; but from heaven comes rain. Therefore their punishment is signified when it is said, "He shall rain upon sinners." And what? "Snares." And if this is expounded of the present, note that in sin there are four things. The first is seduction; hence he says: "He shall rain upon sinners snares." As if by just judgment He permits them to be ensnared and seduced. Is. 8: "And many of them shall stumble and fall and be broken and be ensnared and captured." The second is concupiscence; and so he says, "the fire of concupiscence." Ps. 57: "Fire fell upon them, and they did not see the sun," namely of carnal concupiscence, etc. The third is the stench of infamy; and so he says, "brimstone." Thus the Lord rained fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah. A fourth can be added, namely the restlessness of mind; and so he says, "the spirit of storms." Is. 57: "The heart of the wicked is like a raging sea." "This is the portion of their cup," because the cup is a certain measure, and they receive punishments according to their sins. Is. 27: "In measure against measure, when it shall be cast away, He shall judge." But if this is expounded of the future, then movements shall be punished there, because they shall be bound so that they can neither avoid evils nor attain goods. And so he says, "He shall rain upon sinners snares," that is, binding the senses. And thus brimstone is referred to the sense of smell, and fire to the sense of touch. Is. 66: "Their fire shall not be extinguished." Rev. 20: "Cast into the lake of fire." Likewise the affections, because they do not rest: because "the spirit of storms is the portion of their cup," that is, demons disturbing, troubling, and afflicting. "Because the Lord is just and has loved justice," therefore nothing is to be expected from Him except justice. Jer. 9: "I am the Lord who exercises mercy, judgment, and justice on the earth." Ps. 144: "The Lord is just in all His ways." "Equity has His countenance beheld" -- or "His face" -- that is, equity has been seen by His knowledge; as if to say: to those to whom He makes Himself known and whom He loves, He shows equity.
