Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 1
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 1

[86786] This Psalm is distinguished from the whole work, for it has no title but serves as a kind of title for the entire work. David composed the Psalms in the manner of one praying, who does not maintain a single mode but adapts himself according to the diverse affections and movements of the one praying. This first Psalm therefore expresses the sentiment of a man raising his eyes to the whole state of the world and considering how some advance and others fall away. Among the blessed, Christ was the first; among the wicked, Adam. But note that in one thing all agree, and in two things they differ. They agree in blessedness, which all seek; but they differ in the process toward blessedness and in its outcome, because some attain it and some do not. This Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. In the first, the process of all toward blessedness is described. In the second, the outcome, at "and he shall be like a tree that is planted near the running waters." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, the process of the wicked is touched upon; second, that of the good, at "but his will is in the law of the Lord," etc. In the process of the wicked, three things must be considered. First, deliberation about sin, and this in thought; second, consent and execution; third, inducing others to the same -- and this is the worst. And so first he sets forth the counsel of the wicked, at "blessed is the man," etc. He says "who has not walked," because as long as a man deliberates, he is in the process of going. Second, he sets forth consent and execution, saying: "and in the way of sinners," that is, in their manner of acting. Prov. 4: "The way of the wicked is dark; they do not know where they stumble." "He has not stood," namely by consenting and acting. He says "of the ungodly," because ungodliness is sin against God, and "of sinners" is against neighbor, "and in the seat" -- behold the third -- that is, inducing others to sin. In the seat, therefore, as a teacher, instructing others to sin; and so he says "of pestilence," because pestilence is a contagious disease. Prov. 29: "Pestilent men destroy a city." He therefore who walks in this way is not blessed, but rather he who goes the opposite way. Now the blessedness of man is in God. Ps. 143: "Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord," etc. The right process toward blessedness is therefore, first, that we submit ourselves to God, and this in two ways. First through the will, by obeying His commandments; and so he says: "but in the law of the Lord"; and this pertains especially to Christ. Jn. 6: "I came down from heaven not to do my own will, but the will of Him who sent me." It applies similarly to every just person. And he says "in the law" through love, not "under the law" through fear. 1 Tim. 1: "The law is not made for the just man." Second, through the intellect, by meditating continually; and so he says, "on his law he shall meditate day and night," that is, continuously, or at certain hours of day and night, or in prosperity and adversity.

[86787] In this part the outcome of blessedness is described: and first its diversity is set forth; second, the reason is assigned, at "because the Lord knows," etc. Concerning the first, he does two things. First he sets forth the outcome for the good; second, for the wicked, at "not so the ungodly," etc. Concerning the outcome of the good, he uses a similitude: and first he proposes it; second, he applies it, at "and all things whatsoever he shall do," etc. For the similitude is taken from a tree, in which three things are considered: namely, planting, bearing fruit, and preservation. For planting, earth moistened by waters is necessary, otherwise it would dry up; and so he says: "which is planted near the running waters," that is, near the streams of graces. Jn. 7: "He who believes in me, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." And whoever has roots near this water will bear fruit by doing good works; and this is what follows: "which shall yield its fruit." Gal. 5: "But the fruit of the Spirit is charity, joy, peace, patience, long-suffering, goodness, kindness," etc. "In its season," namely now, when it is the time for working. Gal. 6: "While we have time, let us do good to all." But it does not dry up; rather, it is preserved. Certain trees are preserved in substance but not in their leaves; some are preserved also in their leaves, and so it is with the just. Hence he says, "and its leaf shall not fall off," that is, not even in their least and outward works are they forsaken by God. Prov. 11: "The just shall spring up as a green leaf."

[86788] Then when he says, "and all things," he applies the similitude, because the blessed shall prosper in all things; and this when they obtain their intended end with regard to all that they desire, because the just attain blessedness. Ps. 117: "O Lord, save me; O Lord, grant prosperity," etc. The outcome for the wicked is the opposite, which is described at "not so," etc. And concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the similitude; second, he applies it, at "they shall not rise again." But note that here he puts "not so, not so" twice, for greater certainty. Gen. 41: "That you saw it a second time is a sign of its certainty." Or, "not so" do they act in the process, and therefore "not so" do they receive in the outcome. Lk. 16: "You received good things in your life, and Lazarus likewise evil things; but now he is comforted here, and you are tormented." They are fittingly compared to dust, which has three qualities contrary to what was said about the just man. For dust does not adhere to the earth but is on the surface. But a planted tree is rooted deep. Likewise a tree is compact in itself. It is also moist. But dust is divided in itself, dry and arid. By which is signified that the good are united by charity like a tree. Ps. 117: "Appoint a solemn day with thick boughs, even to the horn of the altar." But the wicked are divided. Prov. 13: "Among the proud there are always quarrels." Likewise the good are rooted in spiritual and divine goods, but the wicked are sustained by external goods. They are also without the water of grace. Gen. 3: "You are dust," etc. And therefore all their wickedness shall flow away, as a leaf flows from the vine and the fig tree, Is. 34. But of the good it is said here that "its leaf shall not fall off." Lk. 21: "A hair of your head shall not perish." But of those wicked it is said that they are totally cast away from the face, that is, from superficial goods, which the wind, that is, tribulation, "shall cast away from the face of the earth." Job 4: "I have seen those who work iniquity and sow sorrows and reap them, perishing by the blast of God and consumed by the spirit of His mouth." Then he applies the similitude at "they shall not rise again," because they are like dust. But against this, 2 Cor. 5: "We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ." Likewise, 1 Cor. 15: "We shall all indeed rise." To which it must be said that this can be read in two ways. For properly speaking, a man is said to "rise" in judgment when his case is upheld by the sentence of the judge. These therefore do not rise, because the sentence in judgment is not pronounced in their favor, but rather against them; hence another reading has "they shall not be established." But the good do rise, because although they were afflicted by the sin of the first parent, they shall nevertheless have the sentence in their favor. "Nor shall sinners be gathered in the assembly of the just." Because the good shall be gathered into eternal life, to which the wicked shall not be admitted. Or it must be said that this is understood of the restoration of justice, to which they are restored by their own judgment. 1 Cor. 11: "If we would judge ourselves, we should not be judged." And with regard to this he says, "they shall not rise in judgment," namely their own, of which it is said in Eph. 5: "Rise, you who sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall enlighten you." Some are restored by the counsel of the good; and in this way also the wicked do not rise from sin. Or "the ungodly," that is, the unbelieving, "do not rise in the judgment" of examination and inquiry, because, according to Gregory, some shall be condemned and not judged, namely the unbelieving; some shall neither be judged nor condemned, namely the apostles and perfect men; some shall be judged and condemned, namely wicked believers. Thus the faithful do not rise in the judgment of examination, so as to be scrutinized. Jn. 3: "He who does not believe is already judged." But sinners do not rise in the assembly of the just, so as to be judged and not condemned. Then the reason is given why they shall not rise in judgment: "because the Lord knows," etc. And he speaks properly, because when someone knows what is lost, it is restored; but when he does not know, it is not restored. The just indeed are dissolved through death, but God knows them. 2 Tim. 2: "God knows who are His" -- He knows, that is, with a knowledge of approval -- and therefore they are restored. But because He does not know the way of the ungodly with a knowledge of approbation, therefore "the way of the ungodly shall perish." Ps. 118: "I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost; seek your servant, O Lord, for I have not forgotten your commandments." Ps. 34: "Let their ways be darkness and slippery," etc.
