Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 6
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 6

[86820] In the preceding Psalm, David asked to be led in the way of justice on account of his enemies; here, however, he asks that his fall be repaired. And this Psalm seems to express the affections of a man who, having been chastised for his sins and delivered into the hands of his enemies, obtained liberation after doing penance. And therefore this is the first of the seven Penitential Psalms. They are seven on account of the seven gifts of the Holy Spirit, by whom one repents; and all begin with weeping and end in joy, because through the lamentation of penance one arrives at the kingdom of glory: Mt. 5: "Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted." The title is as follows: "Unto the end, a Psalm of David, for the octave." Jerome translated it as: "For the leader, in psalms, upon the octave, a song of David." Concerning this title, it remains to be seen what is meant by the expression "for the octave." For the rest has been explained. It should be known, then, that the titles were composed by Ezra partly according to the things that were being done at the time, and partly according to things that had occurred. For it is found in the history of Lev. 23 that in the seventh month the Jews held the feast of tabernacles for seven days, and the eighth day was the most celebrated of all; for it was a day of assembly and collection, which was made for the necessities of divine worship and for the poor. And perhaps David composed this Psalm for that solemnity, and it was recited on the eighth day. Moreover, this feast pertains to a mystery, because by the number eight the resurrection is signified, when all will be gathered from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of heaven, Mk. 13. Or the octave is so called because of the false opinion of certain people who said that after seven thousand years the resurrection would take place, with the Lord coming for judgment. But this time is known to no one: Acts 1: "It is not for you to know the times or the moments," etc. Mt. 24: "But of that day and hour no one knows, neither the angels of heaven, but the Father alone." Hence another reason is given why the octave designates the resurrection: because in the present age there is a twofold life. One in which a person is occupied with bodily matters, the other with spiritual matters. The first life is signified by the number four, because it is the number of bodies, as even Plato says, because through it dimensions are signified. For among solids, the first bodily number is the pyramid, as Boethius teaches in his Arithmetic. Since, therefore, that pyramid is the first which, rising from a triangular base, extends into height, it follows that four is the first solid number. For example, if upon a triangle one erects lines above the three angles and joins the vertices at a single middle point, a pyramid is formed, whose base is one triangle and whose sides are triangles. But the second life, which is spiritual, is signified by the number three; for among plane figures, three is the first surface number. And the same Boethius says this in the same book. For the first surface is the triangle, entirely lacking in thickness. From the number seven, which is constituted from this four and three, the octave follows, namely the resurrection of bodies and souls. In the Gloss, however, another reason is assigned, so that it is said that the number four pertains to the body, because it consists of four elements and is affected by four qualities, namely dry and moist, hot and cold, and is governed by four seasons: spring, summer, autumn, and winter. But the number three pertains to the soul, on account of the three powers of the soul: namely, the rational, the irascible, and the concupiscible. When both lives have been completed, namely the bodily and the spiritual, as though the number seven having passed, the day of judgment will come, and to each person what is due will be rendered according to merit. Or the octave signifies the resurrection because it will occur in the eighth age. For the first age runs from Adam to Noah. The second from Noah to Abraham. The third from Abraham to David. The fourth from David to the Babylonian exile. The fifth from the Babylonian exile to Christ. The sixth from Christ to the end of the world. The sixth and seventh ages run simultaneously, namely the age of those at rest and those laboring, and after these will be the eighth age of those rising. This Psalm is divided into three parts. First, penance is treated. Second, the weeping of penance, at "I have labored," etc. Third, the fruit of both, at "Depart." But a person existing in sin suffers three disadvantages, from which he asks to be freed. The first is the perversity of action; the second is the wounding and weakness of nature; the third is the liability to imminent punishment. First, therefore, he asks to be freed from the first; and so he says, "Lord, not in your fury," etc. Second, against the second; and so he adds in prayer, "Have mercy on me," etc. Third, against the third; and so he subjoins, "But you, O Lord," etc. He says therefore: "Lord, not in your fury." Someone frees another from evil actions by rebuking with words and correcting with punishments; and God does both. But rebuke is sometimes given for correction, and this is in mercy: Ps. 140: "The just man will correct me," etc. Sometimes for condemnation, and this is of wrath. And therefore he says, "Lord, rebuke me," but "not in fury," because that belongs to vengeance, and this will happen in the judgment, when he will say, Mt. 25: "Depart from me, you cursed," etc. "For I was hungry," etc. Is. 30: "His fury is burning and heavy to bear," etc. But now he rebukes not in fury, because he rebukes for correction, not for condemnation; and this is what the Psalmist asks when he says, "Nor in your wrath correct me"; as if to say: correct me, but not in wrath or fury, but through temporal scourges. Augustine says: "Here burn, here cut, here do not spare, so that you may spare for eternity." Jer. 10: "Correct me, but with judgment."

[86821] Then when he says "Have mercy," he asks to be freed from the second, namely from the wounding and weakness of nature. And first he explains the infirmity in general; second in particular, at "Heal," etc. He says therefore, "Have mercy on me, Lord, for I am weak." Sin is a spiritual infirmity; for bodily infirmity occurs from the dissolution of the due proportion of humors. So when the affections of the soul are not proportionate, there is a spiritual sickness; and therefore he says, "I am weak." The Gloss says: "I am weak by nature and by vice, to such a degree that I cannot endure your justice." Ps. 115: "I am your servant and the son of your handmaid." Wis. 9: "A man who is weak and of short time, and lacking in the understanding of judgment and laws." Then when he says "Heal," etc., he explains in particular how he is weak, and this in two ways. First, because he has lost his strength; second, because he has lost his discernment, at "And my soul is greatly troubled," etc. He says therefore: "Heal me, Lord." Jer. 17: "Heal me, Lord, and I shall be healed," etc. Because if a person is free from sin, he is fit for retaining grace and the virtues, which are the person's strength. And therefore, "Heal me, Lord," and this I beg, "because my bones," that is, my strength, namely the virtue and fortitude of my soul, "are troubled." Likewise, discernment is disturbed, inasmuch as it seems to the sinner that he acts rightly when he sins; and therefore he says: "And my soul is greatly troubled," because he has a perverted judgment about what should be done, so that he judges what is good to be evil, and conversely. Then when he says, "But you, Lord," he prays against the liability to damnation. Here he does three things. First, he shows the imminent danger. Second, he asks for the help of grace, at "Turn back." Third, he explains the imminent danger, at "For there is none in death," etc. He says therefore: "I am weak, I cannot rise by myself; but you, Lord, who can -- how long will you not hear me?" Ps. 12: "How long, O Lord, will you forget me utterly?" In this it seemed dangerous to him that he was not being converted. Sir. 5: "Do not delay in turning to the Lord, and do not put it off from day to day, for suddenly his wrath will come, and in the time of vengeance he will destroy you." Hab. 1: "How long shall I cry and you will not hear, shall I call out to you, a true father, and you will not heal?" etc. As if to say: how long shall I be in sin, and you will not give help so that I may rise? And therefore he asks for help, saying, "Turn back," etc. And he touches upon three things: namely, conversion, rescue, and salvation. The eye of a person is not illuminated by the sun unless it has a direct orientation toward it; so too the soul, if it is to receive divine light, must have a direct gaze toward God. And such a direct gaze is always prepared on God's part; but a person turns away, and it is necessary that God convert him, inasmuch as he first turns to us by turning us to himself. And therefore he says, "Turn back." Lam. 5: "Turn us to you, Lord, and we shall be turned," etc. If someone in chains were being dragged to the gallows and saw someone in whom he trusted, he would earnestly ask and say, "Rescue me." In this manner the Psalmist prays, saying, "Rescue my soul"; as if to say: rescue me, dragged by sin, led to death. Prov. 24: "Rescue those who are led to death." Ps. 68: "Rescue me from the mire, that I may not be stuck fast," etc. Col. 1: "He has rescued us from the power of darkness." Likewise, "Save me." After you have freed me from evils, bring me to salvation. Ps. 62: "In him is my salvation"; and this not through my merits, but "on account of your mercy": Tit. 3: "Not by works of justice which we have done, but according to his own mercy he saved us."

[86822] Then when he says "For," he shows the imminent danger. And first, the danger of present death, namely natural death. Second, of eternal damnation, from which there is no return. Hence, "For there is none in death," that is, after death, "who is mindful of you," namely by thinking of your goodness, if he was not mindful of it in life. And this is so because the rational soul does not have flexibility of choice after death. Eccl. 11: "Whether a tree falls to the south or to the north, in whatever place it falls, there it will be." The second danger is that in Hell there is obstinacy, and there is no confession there -- that confession of which the Apostle speaks, Rom. 10: "With the mouth confession is made unto salvation." And therefore he says: "But in Hell, who will confess to you?" Or alternatively: "In death," that is, the death of sin, "who is mindful of you?" As if to say: I beseech you, rescue my soul lest I consent, because in my sin I will not be mindful of you. Dan. 13: "They turned away their eyes so as not to see heaven, nor to remember just judgments." "But in Hell," that is, in the depths of sins, "who will confess to you?" Prov. 18: "When the impious man comes into the depths of sins, he will show contempt."

[86823] Then when he says "I have labored," he sets forth the groaning of the penitent, where he seems to touch upon three things. First, sorrow of heart. Second, failure of reason, at "My eye is troubled." Third, weakness of strength, at "I have grown old." Sorrow of heart is indicated in three ways. First, by groaning and sighs. Second, by bodily restlessness. Third, by tears. As to the first, he says, "I have labored in my groaning," namely by sighing: Lam. 1: "Many are my groanings, and my heart is sorrowful," etc. Ps. 37: "I roared from the groaning of my heart." And he says "I have labored," because it is labor to fight against oneself, and yet this labor bears good fruit: Wis. 3: "Glorious is the fruit of good labors." As to the second, he says, "I will wash": here he mentions two things, namely the bed and the bedding; and although these two are taken for the same thing, we follow the proper meaning. Bedding refers to the coverings spread upon the bed. The bed is that which is placed underneath, and is called "lectus" from "choosing," namely the straw and similar materials from which the bed is made. By saying, therefore, "I will wash my bed every night," he gives us to understand that every night he would rise and, leaning beside his bed, weep. Jerome's text reads, "I will make my bed swim"; and it is a figurative expression. Or, "I will make it swim," that is, I will cause it to move as if swimming, from my restlessness upon it. He says moreover, "With my tears I will drench my bedding," because even while lying in bed, he would drench the bed coverings by weeping, as if with a flood of tears. Morally, the bed in which a person rests is the conscience; this a person washes through tears in penance: Jer. 4: "Wash your heart from wickedness." By the bedding are signified sins, which are spread over the conscience; and these must be washed away with tears, because tears wash away the offense that one is ashamed to confess. The Gloss says: Lam. 2: "My eyes have failed from weeping," etc. He says "every night," that is, for each sin. For a person ought to weep in penance for each sin. Here it is given to be understood that the penitent has alternating turns, because among the good things he did, he sometimes sinned, and he wept for each. Hence he does not say "for one night," but "for each night." Moreover, he says "I will drench" on account of the abundance of tears: Jer. 9: "Who will give water to my head and tears to my eyes," etc. Lam. 2: "Pour out tears like a torrent by day and night; let not the pupils of your eyes be silent."

[86824] Next, when he says "My eye is troubled," he sets forth the failure of reason. For sorrow is the cause of anger; and therefore one who is sorrowful easily grows angry. But anger always disturbs the eye of reason. And those who are disturbed foresee less well. And therefore he says: "My eye is troubled," that is, my reason, "but by the fury of others." For David was angry and troubled when he saw that Absalom his son and his counselors had risen against him. Or "by his own fury," because he was troubled against his own sins. For he recognized, in the state of that persecution, that he was justly afflicted on account of his sins; and this anger does not blind, but disturbs. But another kind of anger does blind. Or "by your fury," O Lord God, by which you punish me, as if provoked by me, because I have troubled you: Is. 38: "My eyes are weakened by looking upward": Job 16: "My face is swollen from weeping and lamentation," etc. Third, he shows the weakness of strength when he says, "I have grown old," etc. When someone in his youth was victorious and strong, but afterward suffers not only from a stranger but also from his own kin, he is considered to be growing old. So David, who in his youth had conquered all, but now was fleeing from his own son, says, "I have grown old," namely in the estimation of others, "among all my enemies," both open and hidden: Heb. 8: "But what grows old and ages is near to destruction." Or the sinner grows old by departing from the newness of Christ, of which the Apostle speaks, Rom. 6: "Let us walk in newness of life, that we may serve in newness of spirit." Rom. 7, the Gloss says: "Let us serve in the works of the new man, that is, of Christ, which we attain not by our own powers or by the law, but by the grace of the Holy Spirit." "Knowing that our old man was crucified together with him," Rom. 6, "so that the body of sin might be destroyed, that we might no longer serve sin." Through which servitude one is reduced to the oldness of sin, having become a member of the old man. For this reason the Apostle urges and persuades, Rom. 12: "Be reformed in the newness of your sense, or of your mind." "Be reformed," says the Gloss, "because in Adam you were deformed in newness," etc. The new man, namely Christ. That is, in imitation of this oldness and wretchedness of deformity, the prophet laments under a question, saying, Bar. 3: "What is it, O Israel, that you are in the land of your enemies? You have grown old in a foreign land," etc. And this agrees with what is said here, "I have grown old among all my enemies": whether demons, or all the sins to which I have consented. And so what he says, "I have grown old," in this sense is the matter of groaning; as if to say: therefore "I will wash," etc., because I have grown old, having imitated the old man, subjecting myself to all vices. And then what was said, "My eye is troubled," etc., is referred to the state of the penitent. Or it can be referred to the matter of justice, and this with regard to the state of sin; as if to say: therefore I have grown old, that is, I have sinned, because my eye, that is, my flesh, was troubled by fury, that is, by the impulse of passion: Ps. 57: "Fire," namely of concupiscence, according to Augustine's Gloss, "fell upon them, and they did not see the sun," namely of justice: Dan. 13: "Concupiscence subverted your heart." Likewise: "They burned with desire for her," etc., "so that they did not remember just judgments." From the impulse of passion, therefore, David says that the eye of reason was disturbed in him, so that he did not see heaven; and this was the concupiscence for Bathsheba, 2 Kgs. 11, whom he summoned to himself and knew. And afterward, having learned that she was pregnant, to the crime of adultery he added the crime of murder. Hence he ordered Uriah, Bathsheba's husband, to be treacherously killed; for which most grave sins, by the just judgment of God, he suffered persecution from his son.

[86825] "Depart." This is the third principal part, in which the fruit of penance is set forth. Hence here he shows himself to have been heard, and thereupon he rejoices. And concerning this he does three things. First, he repels his enemies from himself. Second, he confesses that he has been heard, at "For you have heard." Third, he foretells the fate of his enemies, at "Let them be ashamed." He says therefore, "Depart," etc. Suppose that someone has been afflicted on account of sin; after pardon has been given, he can taunt his enemies, whether those who led him into sin or those who persecute him bodily. According to the literal sense, Jerome says "Depart from me," to those who lead me into sin, "because I do not want your company": 2 Cor. 6: "Therefore separate yourselves, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you." Or, "Depart from me, all you who work iniquity," that is, you unjust workers who persecute me unjustly. "Depart," I say, "from me, because the Lord is with me as a mighty warrior": Jer. 20. Hence Ps. 26: "If armies encamp against me, my heart shall not fear." And through this is signified the future persecution and separation of the wicked from the good: Mt. 13: "They will separate the wicked from the midst of the just." Likewise Mt. 25: "They will separate them from one another, as a shepherd separates," etc. And further in the same chapter: "Depart from me, you cursed," etc. Next, when he says "For he has heard," he declares that he has been heard. Here it should be noted that above he had set forth three things: namely, prayer, when he said "Have mercy"; second, entreaty, that he might be freed: "Turn back"; third, lamentation: "I have labored," etc. And these three he says were heard in reverse order. And first the groaning, saying, "The Lord has heard," etc. The groaning of the saints has a voice before God: Sir. 35: "He will not despise the voice of the orphan, nor the widow if she pour forth her speech of groaning. Do not the widow's tears run down her cheek, and her cry go up against the one who caused them? From the cheek they ascend to heaven, and the Lord who hears will not take pleasure in them." And Gen. 4: "The voice of your brother's blood cries to me from the earth." Therefore that holy lady Judith said, Jud. 8: "Let us seek his pardon with tears." Second, the entreaty; for entreaty, properly according to the Gloss of Cassiodorus, is for the removal of evils: Lk. 1: "Your entreaty has been heard." The Gloss says there, "By which you prayed for the liberation of the people." To show, therefore, that he has been freed from the evils for which he had prayed, saying "Turn back," etc., he adds here: "The Lord has heard my entreaty." Third, the prayer, namely that it might enter into his sight; and this is what he adds: "The Lord has received my prayer." And note that he says "Lord" three times here, to show that he has been heard by the whole Trinity: Ps. 66: "May God, our God, bless us; may God bless us."

[86826] Next, when he says "Let them be ashamed," he sets forth the fate of the enemies. As if it were said: you tell your enemies, "Depart." But what will become of them when they depart from you? Certainly, "Let them be ashamed," etc. These words can be explained in a good sense and in a bad sense. If in a good sense, then they are spoken in the manner of a prayer. Here he asks four things for them: namely, shame for their sins, because this is the beginning of the amendment of life; Sir. 4: "There is a shame that brings glory." Hence, "Let them be ashamed." Second, sorrow for their sins: "Let them be troubled": Ps. 59: "You have shaken the earth and troubled it," etc. For the penitent ought to have a greater intensity of sorrow than the pleasure he had in sin. Third, conversion to God; hence, "Let them be converted": Is. 31: "Return, as you had deeply withdrawn, O children of Israel." And fourth, shame: "Let them be ashamed and troubled exceedingly." Now shame is both the beginning and the end of amendment. But the reason can be given differently: namely, that at the beginning one is ashamed of the eyes of other people, and this grieves him, and he avoids evil; but in the end one is ashamed before the eye of his own reason and the eye of God: Rom. 6: "What fruit did you have then in those things, of which you are now ashamed?" Concerning the second, Lk. 18: "The tax collector, standing far off, would not even lift his eyes to heaven." And this should happen very quickly, so that there is no delay: Sir. 5: "Do not delay in turning to the Lord," etc. But if they are taken in a bad sense, then they should be understood as spoken in the manner of a prediction. As if to say: "Let them be ashamed," by the detection of their sin before all: Is. 1: "You shall be ashamed of the gardens you have chosen, when you shall be like an oak shedding its leaves," etc. "And let them be troubled," with an astonishing fear and sorrow: Wis. 5: "They shall be troubled with a horrible fear," etc. And therefore he says, "Exceedingly -- let all my enemies be converted," recognizing their own guilt and the glory of the saints: Wis. 5: "These are the ones whom we once held in derision and as a reproach; we, fools," etc. "And let them be ashamed," because this recognition will be to their confusion; and this "very swiftly": Is. 30: "Suddenly, when it is not expected, his destruction will come," etc. Job 21: "In a moment they go down to Hell." 1 Thess. 5: "The day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night. For when they shall say, peace and security," etc.
