Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 35
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 35

[87144] In the preceding Psalm the Psalmist implored the help of God against the persecutions of sinners; here he describes the wickedness of sinners. The title is "Unto the end, of the servant of God." And this is something new, that he says "of the servant of God." That man is a faithful servant who does not claim for himself the goods of his master, and does not turn back his own evils upon the master. For there are some who turn their sins back upon God, saying that they sin by necessity: and they claim their own goods for themselves, saying that they have them by their own power. David does the contrary: and concerning this he does two things. First he makes mention of the evils that are in us from ourselves. Second, of the goods that are in us from God, at "O Lord, in heaven." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the root of evil. Second he sets forth the progress of evil from that root, at "The words of his mouth." The root of evil is the intention. First therefore the evil intention is proposed. Second, the cause is set forth, at "There is no fear." Third, he proves it, at "Because he has acted deceitfully." As the Philosopher says in Ethics 3, here someone does an unjust thing, and does not act unjustly; someone does it and acts unjustly, but is not unjust: someone does it and acts unjustly, and is unjust. The first is done by one who retains the property of another which he believes to be his own. The second is done by one who commits injustice not from habit but from passion, and when the passion ceases he returns the property of another. The third is done by one who commits injustice from deliberate intention; and therefore he says, "The unjust man has said," that is, he has deliberated with intention "to transgress in himself": because it is in his power to intend to sin, not in the fate of the stars: Sir. 15: "God in the beginning made man, and left him in the hand of his own counsel"; but the unrestrained progress of sinning comes from the fact that the impediment to sin is removed. Now it is said that sin against the Holy Spirit occurs when one sins from certain malice; and this happens when the impediment is removed. This impediment, then, is removed by the fear of the Lord: Prov. 16: "By the fear of the Lord one turns away from evil": Job 15: "As much as is in you, you have emptied out the fear, and taken away prayers," etc. And therefore he says, "There is no fear of God before their eyes." Fear is in the affections; but the cause of fear is in the eyes, from the fact that they do not consider the judgment of God: Dan. 13: "They turned away their eyes, so as not to see heaven": but the cause is, "because he has acted deceitfully." When someone in the sight of a king does something hateful to the king, it is a sign that he does not fear him; so the sinner, when he commits sin in the presence of God, who sees all things, it is a sign that he does not fear God, because "in his sight," namely of God, "he has acted deceitfully," that is, he has committed deceit: Heb. 4: "All things are naked and open to his eyes." And he says "deceitfully," because he shows one thing outwardly and pretends another: Ps. 5: "The man of blood and deceit the Lord shall abhor": Job 36: "The pretenders and the crafty provoke the wrath of God." And therefore "let his iniquity be found worthy of hatred," that is, let his iniquity be such that God has it in hatred. And this is a sign that God hates such pretenders, because in the Gospels God greatly inveighs against pretenders. Another reading has "in his own sight, that he might see his iniquity and hate it." It happens that someone examines his conscience so as to find his iniquity and hate it. Frequently in this he acts fraudulently, because he does not examine well, but makes light of serious things and makes serious what is light. And therefore he says, "he has acted deceitfully in his own sight," that is, in his conscience; because if he had faithfully hated his iniquity, he would have examined it. Or, according to the same sense, "in his sight," namely of God, that is, in Sacred Scripture, which they do not attend to according to its truth and the Holy Spirit's meaning, but act deceitfully; and this is because "they do not find iniquity." Next he sets forth the progress from the root. And first he sets forth the sins of the mouth. Second, of the heart and of action. A man commits sin by the mouth in two ways: either through open malice, when he lies openly; and this is what he says: "The words of his mouth are iniquity": Job 6: "You shall not find iniquity in my mouth." Or through hidden fraud; and this is "deceit": Jer. 9: "Their tongue is a wounding arrow; it has spoken deceit." In the heart one sins in two ways: by contempt for the good, and by the pursuit of evil. It happens that someone sins through weakness, and someone through ignorance. But when the ignorance is affected, then it is a grave sin: Job 21: "We do not want the knowledge of your ways." And therefore he says, "He was unwilling to understand so as to do good"; hence he was willing to understand curious things, but not so as to act well: Jer. 4: "They are wise to do evil; but to do good they have no knowledge." Likewise, sometimes a man commits sin from a pursuit of malice; hence he says, "He has meditated iniquity on his bed," that is, in his heart. Or "on his bed," that is, when he is in secret: Prov. 24: "The thought of a fool is sin and abomination." "He has set himself." Here he sets forth what is committed in action. And first he sets forth the cooperation in evil. Second, the failure to prevent evil. As to the first he says, "He has set himself upon every way that is not good," that is, he lives and gives support to every evil way, or evil action: Ps. 2: "The kings of the earth took their stand." As to the second he says, "But he has not hated malice": Ps. 51: "You have loved malice above goodness, iniquity," etc. Job 20: "When evil is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under his tongue."

[87145] "O Lord." Here he shows what he has received from God. And first he enumerates the goods themselves. Second he asks that they be given to him, at "Extend." Concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes the cause of the goods he has received from God. Second he enumerates the goods themselves, at "Men and beasts." And first he sets forth the commendation of the cause. Second he proposes the profundity of the effects, at "Your judgments." Whatever God does in us is either from justice, or from mercy, or from truth. From justice, when he renders according to merits. From truth, when he renders what he has promised. From mercy, when he exceeds merits and promises. Let us prove these three. The justice of God is lofty, because no one merits so much that God does not give back more. The truth is loftier, because God promises and pays what we never merited, such as the incarnation and other things pertaining to the mystery of redemption. But mercy is the loftiest: because the things we cannot even conceive, he bestows: 1 Cor. 2: "Eye has not seen," etc. And therefore he compares justice to mountains, truth to clouds, which are higher, and mercy to the heavens, which are above all. He says: "O Lord, in heaven is your mercy," which is the cause of all my goods, "is in heaven": Ps. 144: "His mercies are above all things," etc. Is. 63: "I will remember the mercies of the Lord." "And your truth reaches to the clouds. Your justice is like the mountains of God." All these things are said according to their effects, because according to their essence they are the same. Mystically, by these three are understood the just, because in the just themselves are found justice, truth, and mercy. The just are signified by the heaven because of retribution and charity: Mt. 5: "Your reward is great in heaven." Likewise, in them mercy shines forth most greatly, because they are entirely freed from every tribulation. We, however, are still in calamities. By the clouds are understood the teachers: Is. 5: "I will command my clouds not to rain upon it." And in them the truth which they make manifest shines forth. By the mountains are understood holy men. And what follows from all these? That "these judgments are a great abyss," that is, incomprehensible: Rom. 11: "How incomprehensible are his judgments," etc.

[87146] "Men." Above the Psalmist commended the justice, truth, and mercy of God, and his judgments, from which goods come to us; here he enumerates those goods: and concerning this he does two things. First he commemorates the goods that he commonly bestows upon every creature. Second, the proper goods that he confers upon the rational creature, at "But the children of men." Concerning the first he does two things. First he commemorates the things that commonly come from God. Second he rises to admiration of the divine mercy, at "How you have multiplied." I say, therefore, that your mercy is great, and from it "you save men and beasts," that is, rational and irrational creatures. Or by "men" are understood the just, and by "beasts" the sinners themselves, who are saved by God with temporal salvation: Mt. 5: "He sends rain upon the just and the unjust": Ps. 48: "Man, when he was in honor, did not understand," etc. And this common salvation consists in two things: namely, in the health of the body: Sir. 30: "There is no wealth above the wealth of bodily health": and in the provision of necessities: 2 Kgs. 6: "Save me, O king." Who said: "The Lord does not save you. How can I save you? From the threshing floor or from the winepress?" Next he marvels at the divine mercy, at "How you have multiplied." Namely, how greatly you have multiplied your mercy, namely that you save not only men but also beasts. Or that you care not only for the just but also for sinners, as to the temporal goods which you multiply in them. Jerome has "How precious," etc. For the mercy of God is great, in that he saves all: great also, because he gives to each one more than he merited: Ps. 85: "Your mercy is great upon me."

[87147] "But the children." Here he sets forth the spiritual goods, which are three: confidence, spiritual nourishment, and intelligible knowledge: and these correspond to the grades of beings. Of beings, some merely exist; some exist and live; some in addition to this also understand; and among beings the rational creature participates in a certain eternity, because the rational soul does not perish. And therefore he says, "The children of men," that is, the children of God, of Christ: or by "the children of men" are understood generally all men. "They shall hope under the covering of your wings." And he speaks metaphorically. A hen protects her chicks with her wings lest they be killed; so God himself with spiritual protection protects the rational creature lest it fail, especially in the soul: Mt. 23: "How often I wanted to gather your children," etc. Is. 49: "Under the covering of his hand he protected me." Or "under the covering," that is, under spiritual protection. And so the two wings are the teaching of the New and the Old Testament. Likewise those who live here below are nourished with a special nourishment. And first he sets forth the nourishment itself. Second he sets forth its cause, at "With you." Spiritual nourishment consists in two things: namely, in the gifts of God and in his sweetness. As to the first he says, "They shall be inebriated with the richness of your house." The house is the Church: 1 Tim. 3: "That you may know how one ought to conduct oneself in the house of God." And this house, which is now on earth, will one day be transferred to the heavens: Ps. 121: "We shall go into the house of the Lord with joy." In both there is a richness of the gifts of God; but in this Church it is imperfect, whereas in the other there is a most perfect abundance of all goods, and with this spiritual men are satisfied: Ps. 64: "We shall be filled with the goods of your house." And what is more, they are inebriated, insofar as desires are filled beyond every measure of merit: for inebriation is a certain excess: Is. 64: "What eye has not seen," etc. Song 5: "Be inebriated, most beloved." And those who are inebriated are not in themselves but outside themselves. So those who are filled with spiritual gifts, their entire attention is directed toward God: Phil. 3: "Our conversation is in heaven." And they shall be nourished not only by gifts but also by the love of God: Job 22: "Then you shall abound in delights over the Almighty, and you shall lift up your face to God." And therefore as to the second he says, "And you shall give them to drink from the torrent of your delight." This is the love of the Holy Spirit, which makes an impetus in the soul like a torrent: Is. 59: "Like a violent river which the spirit of the Lord drives." And it is called "of delight" because it produces pleasure and sweetness in the soul: Wis. 12: "O how good and sweet is your spirit, O Lord, within us." And with this drink the good are given to drink: 1 Cor. 10: "They all drank the same spiritual drink." Or "the torrent of your delight," namely of God, which is called a torrent: Prov. 18: "An overflowing torrent, a fountain of wisdom": because his will is so efficacious that it cannot be resisted, just as a torrent cannot: Rom. 9: "Who resists his will?" The matter of such nourishment is that they are joined to the fountain: and just as those who would hold their mouth to a fountain of wine would become inebriated, so those who hold their mouth, that is, their desire, to the fountain of life and sweetness, become inebriated: 1 Cor. 11: "But another is drunk." And so they are inebriated, because "with you is the fountain of life." If this is referred to Christ, the sense is: "With you," etc., that is, you are the fountain of life. But if it is referred to the Father, the sense is: "With you is the fountain of life," that is, your Word, which gives life to all things. It is with you. Jn. 1: "The Word was with God": Jer. 2: "They have forsaken me, the fountain of living water," etc. He who is truly the fountain of life, that is, of spiritual goods, by which all things are given life. The second is intelligible knowledge, which men, that is, rational creatures, participate in. Therefore he says:

[87148] "And in your light." There are two privileges of the rational creature. One is that the rational creature sees in the light of God, and because other animals do not see in the light of God, he therefore says "in your light." This is not understood of light created by God, because in that sense it would be understood as that which is said in Gen. 1: "Let there be light." But "in your light," namely that by which you shine, which is the likeness of your substance. This light is not shared by brute animals; but the rational creature first participates in it through natural knowledge: for the natural reason of man is nothing other than the radiance of the divine brightness in the soul: on account of which brightness man is made in the image of God: Ps. 4: "The light of your countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us." The second is the light of grace: Eph. 5: "Rise, you who sleep," etc. The third is the light of glory: Is. 60: "Arise, be illuminated, O Jerusalem, for your light has come," etc. Or "in your light," that is, in Christ, who is light from light: and thus he is the light that is true God. Christ is therefore light insofar as he proceeds from the Father: he is the fountain of life insofar as he is the principle of the life-giving Spirit. The other privilege is that only the rational creature sees this light: hence he says, "We shall see light." This light is either created truth, that is, Christ insofar as he is man; or it is uncreated truth, by which we know certain truths. For spiritual light is truth: because just as through light something is known insofar as it is luminous, so it is known insofar as it is true. Brute animals indeed know certain truths, for instance, this thing is sweet: but they do not know the truth of the proposition "this is true": because this consists in the adequation of the intellect to the thing, which brute animals cannot achieve. Therefore brutes do not have created light. Similarly, nor uncreated light, because only man was made to see God through faith and through hope: and just as we now see through faith in the light, so we shall see him in his essence when we are in the fatherland.

[87149] "Extend your mercy." Here he turns to prayer, and asks for the mercy of God. And first he asks his petition regarding others. Second, regarding himself, at "Let not the foot of pride come to me." He asks two things, corresponding to two kinds of people who dwell in the house of the Lord: for some know God through faith; some who are also justified cling to him. Those who do not know God are not in his house; but those who have faith can be subject to sin, and therefore he asks mercy for them. Hence he says: O Lord, to those who know you, through faith, namely -- and he calls this knowledge "science" because of firm adherence -- to these "extend," that is, expand, extend to them your mercy by having mercy on their sins: Is. 27: "It is not a wise people": Jer. 9: "Let him who glories, glory in this, to know and understand me." But to those who are "upright of heart," that is, who have a right heart and are confirmed to you through charity, "extend to them," that is, expand, "your justice," that is, the crown which they have merited; because these already merit the crown: 2 Tim. 4: "For the rest, there is laid up for me a crown of justice," etc. And therefore he asks just things for them. For himself he asks two things. First he asks to be preserved from sin, and this by removing two causes of sin. One is interior: and this is pride, which is the beginning of all sin; hence he says, "Let not the foot of pride come to me," that is, let the desire to be proud be removed from me: Sir. 23: "Do not give me the haughtiness of the eyes." The other cause is exterior, when someone is incited by another to sin: Ps. 18: "And from aliens spare your servant." And therefore he says, "Let not the hand of the sinner move me," that is, let not inducements and promises and flattery lead me to sin.

[87150] "There they have fallen." Here the reason for the petition is set forth: and it is twofold. First, because from this foot there is a fall: just as when someone falls because of a bad foot: and therefore he says, "There," that is, in the foot of pride. "They have fallen." Behold, the beginning of all sin is pride, Sir. 10. For man sins from this, that he is not contained under the rule of the divine law. But from pride comes arrogance: 1 Cor. 10: "He who thinks he stands," that is, through pride, "let him take heed lest he fall." And he says "who work," not "who have worked," because someone sometimes sins from weakness or ignorance, and such a one does not persist; but he who sins from pride persists: because Prov. 2: "They rejoice when they have done evil, and exult in the worst things." Likewise, the other cause is the impulse of another; hence he says, "They were driven out," that is, they were pushed while they vainly exalted themselves, just as Lucifer was driven from heaven, and man through pride was driven from Paradise. "Nor could they stand": Job 18: "He shall be driven from light into darkness," etc. But humility makes one stand: Ps. 121: "Our feet were standing," etc.