Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 4
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 4

[86804] In the preceding Psalm, David implored the help of God against tribulations by praying, and sensing that he was heard, he exhorts others to trust in God. And this Psalm expresses the affections of a man who, having experienced divine mercy and benefits and justice, exhorts others not to despair. Its title is: "Unto the end, a Psalm of the canticle of David." In this title two things are to be considered for the whole book: namely what he says, "a Psalm of the canticle." Second, what he says, "unto the end." As to the first, note that David, as we read in 2 Sam. 6, composed the Psalm metrically and sang before the ark with the psaltery. Therefore a "Psalm" is said to be what is sung to the psaltery, but not without the psaltery. In certain Psalms, "Psalm of David" is inscribed, where it is understood that it was composed for the psaltery. In others, "Canticle of David" is placed as a heading, because it was sung without an instrument. In others, "Psalm of the canticle of David," or conversely, because that Psalm was sung simultaneously with the human voice and to the psaltery. But in some, one or many began with the human voice without an instrument, and one responded with the psaltery; and these are entitled "canticle of the Psalm." In others, one sang the Psalm with the psaltery, and others responded without the psaltery: and these are entitled "Psalm of the canticle." And this is the literal difference; but mystically and according to the Gloss, a "Psalm" signifies good action; a "canticle" however signifies the exultation of the mind over eternal things. When both are placed together in one Psalm, it signifies that both are treated. What he says "unto the end," if this is considered as to the thing prefigured by the Psalm, it is clear that "unto the end" means unto Christ; Rom. 10: "Christ is the end of the law, for justice to everyone who believes." But if "unto the end" is considered according to the figure, it is given to be understood that it was sung for the completion of a work or affair, just as this Psalm was composed for the completed liberation of David from the persecution of Absalom, as though for a victory. Others say "to the victor," namely David, in the Psalms, because he surpassed all in composing Psalms; but this does not seem true. This Psalm is divided into two parts: for first it begins with an act of thanksgiving for benefits received; hence he says: "When I called upon," etc. Second, it ends in an exhortation of others to turn to God, at "O sons of men," etc. Concerning the first, he does two things. First he gives thanks for past things. Second he prays for future things, at "Have mercy on me," etc. Concerning the first, he does two things. First he gives thanks that he was heard. Second he shows how he was heard, at "In tribulation," etc. But note that here there is a double reading: one says "he heard"; the other has "you heard"; and Jerome agrees with this, saying "you heard"; in this, however, the point is not significant. He says, therefore: "When I called upon you, you heard," etc. Here four things are to be considered. First he sets forth his prayer and the hearing: hence he says, "you heard." But he did not hear one who was not crying out; hence he says, "when I called upon you"; which is to implore help in necessity. Ps. 119: "To the Lord, when I was in trouble, I cried, and he heard me." Likewise it is required that one be just: because if he hears sinners, it is from mercy, not from justice; and therefore he says, "of my justice": where the Gloss says: that is, "giver of justice," or "of my justification." Ps. 33: "The eyes of the Lord are upon the just." Another requirement, which is the first, is that a man attribute his justice to God, and not to himself; and therefore he says, "O God." Against which, Rom. 10: "Being ignorant of the justice of God, and seeking to establish their own," etc. First, therefore, one must attribute his good to God; second, have justice; third, cry out; fourth, be heard. The manner of hearing is described when he says, "in tribulation." He says "he heard" and "you enlarged," either because the Psalm was perhaps composed metrically, where it was necessary to change the construction on account of the meter; or because he speaks in the manner of one praying, where from different affections a person changes his mode of speaking. He says, moreover, "in tribulation you have enlarged me," because "you have enlarged" is more than "you have freed"; as if to say, not only did you free me, but in the very tribulation you granted breadth of heart. Ps. 17: "You have enlarged my steps under me, and my footsteps have not been weakened." Or breadth of soul for enduring patiently, or breadth of power, of which it is said in Gen. 9: "May God enlarge Japheth." Then when he says, "Have mercy on me," removing whatever remained of past misery; and "hear me," praying for future goods.

[86805] Then when he says, "O sons," etc., he turns to the exhortation of others: and concerning this he does two things. First he rebukes sinners; second he exhorts them to amendment, at "And know," etc. Concerning the first he does two things. First he recalls their condition; second he charges their fault, at "Why do you love"; he recalls their condition saying, "sons of men": which can be understood in two ways. First in a bad sense, thus: "sons of men," as if men according to their lower nature, corruptible and prone to sin. Gen. 6: "My spirit shall not remain in man forever because he is flesh." And again, chapter 8: "The senses and thoughts of men are prone to evil from their youth." "Sons of men," therefore; as if to say, you show yourselves to be sons of men, that is, of sinners, namely of Eve and Adam. "How long will you be heavy of heart?" Is. 1: "Woe to the sinful nation, to the people heavy with iniquity," etc. Second in a good sense: because man insofar as he is man is the image of God: hence "sons of men," not of beasts. Ps. 48: "Man, when he was in honor, did not understand," etc. And "O heavy of heart," that is, because you ought to have a heart that is grave and stable, how long will you not turn to God? And this is what Jerome has: "Sons of the noble, how long will my honored ones shamefully love vanity, seeking falsehood?" And so he fittingly charges the fault: "Why do you love," etc. For in sin two things are to be considered: namely, the will adhering to the thing, and the disordered intention. First, therefore, he touches upon the disordered love when he says, "Why do you love," etc., that is, something vain, not solid -- for temporal things are vain because they do not contain anything solid, but only a passing good. Eccl. 1: "Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity." Why therefore do you love, etc., as if to say, why do you love temporal things? Second, he touches upon the depraved intention when he says, "and why do you seek after falsehood," that is, why do you love riches, so as to have sufficiency? For Eccl. 5: "The covetous man shall not be filled with money." Jer. 4: "I looked upon the earth," etc. Or "falsehood," that is, an idol, 1 Cor. 8: "An idol is nothing." How long, therefore, do you love and seek this, and do not turn to God?

[86806] Second, when he says, "And know," he exhorts sinners to amendment: and concerning this he does three things. First he recalls the benefits shown to himself. Second he exhorts them to return to God, at "Be angry," etc. Third he shows his preeminence over them in goods, at "You have given gladness," etc. He says, therefore, "And know," etc. But note that here in the Greek there is a diapsalma, and in the Hebrew there is selah, which Jerome translated as "happily" or "always." A diapsalma, therefore, is a division of the Psalm: when they sang, certain intervals were made in the Psalm, to show that what follows pertained to another matter, according to Augustine. But against this is the fact that, according to this, diapsalma would never be found at the end of a Psalm; but in Jerome's Psalter, selah is found at the end of a Psalm. And therefore selah is derived from "salon," that is, "peacefully." And this agrees with Jerome, who translated it as "happily." So then, more properly, "peacefully," as if "always," and this is what selah conveys. The benefit he recalls is twofold: one from the past, and another from the future, at "The Lord will hear." As to the first he says, "And know," etc.; and since it is the beginning of a sentence, it is connected to the heart of the prophet, just as that passage at the beginning of Ezekiel: "And it came to pass in the thirtieth year," etc. For selah, which is translated as diapsalma, is placed here, which denotes an interruption. Or it is connected to what precedes; as if to say: do not love vanity, and know why? "Because the Lord has made wonderful," etc. Behold how many good things he has done for me: because he has made wonderful, etc., that is, he has rendered wonderful. It can also be connected in another way according to the Gloss; as if to say: since they are vain, know, and know what you should follow: "Because the Lord has made his holy one wonderful," etc., that is, Christ, understood principally through the figure, who is the Holy One of holy ones, of whom Dan. 9 speaks: God showed him wonderful by raising him up and placing him at his right hand. Every just person, too, is wonderful; because the works of justice are greater than outward miracles. Ps. 67: "God is wonderful in his saints." But Christ is most wonderful. Is. 9: "And his name shall be called Wonderful." As to the second he says, "The Lord will hear." Is. 65: "Before they call, I will hear," etc.

[86807] Then when he says, "Be angry," he exhorts them to the amendment of life: and concerning this he does three things. First he exhorts them to withdraw from evil; second, to tend toward the good, at "Offer the sacrifice"; third, he raises a question, at "Many say," etc. Concerning the first, it should be considered that sin in us most frequently arises from three sources: namely, from the corruption of the irascible, the rational, and the concupiscible powers. First, therefore, he prohibits the sin that arises from the first; hence he says, "Be angry," etc. This is understood in three ways. First, of disordered anger; as if to say: it is permitted that the movement of anger arises in us; nevertheless you should not lead your anger to the act of sin. Eph. 4: "Let not the sun go down upon your anger." Second, thus: "Be angry," that is, against your own sins. Is. 63: "My indignation itself helped me," etc. "And do not sin," namely again; as if to say: be angry against past sins so that you do not commit others. Third, of anger through zeal, it is expounded thus: be angry against the vices of others; and yet do not sin by correcting them in a disordered way, because anger should be directed by reason. Second, he prohibits the vice of the rational power, namely dissimulation, saying: "What you say in your hearts," supply, "let it be in you"; as if to say: do not be one thing in heart and pretend another outwardly. Third, he prohibits what arises from the concupiscible power. "Be compunctious," namely for the sins you have committed; "in your chambers." Rom. 13: "Not in chambers and impurities," etc. Or it should be said that he touches upon a twofold sin: namely of anger, as has been said, "be angry" concerning anger through zeal. Second, of concupiscence: "be compunctious for what you say in your hearts," that is, for your evil thoughts, "in your chambers," that is, concerning hidden things, or in secret. And this better fits the reading of Jerome, who says, "Speak and be silent," that is, do not publicize by carrying it out in a disordered way. Or concerning anger as a vice, which he forbids to proceed to action, which is worse. Or concerning anger against sins. Consequently, he exhorts them to do good. And first he directs them concerning the principle of good, because "offer the sacrifice of justice"; as if to say, namely be contrite. In Lev. 4, it is commanded that they offer a sacrifice for sins. But the Lord does not care much about such things. Ps. 39: "Sacrifice and oblation you did not desire, but you have perfected ears for me"; hence you also "offer the sacrifice of justice and hope in the Lord": "many say, who shows us," etc., that is, of satisfaction and penance. Rom. 12: "Present your bodies to God, a living sacrifice, holy, pleasing to God," etc. Second, he directs them concerning the end of the good, saying: "And hope in the Lord," etc.: as if to say, be hoping in the Lord who has given you the power to do these things.

[86808] Then when he says, "Many," he raises the question which the "many," that is, the foolish, ask: and they say, "Who shows us good things?" As if to say: how can we know what these sacrifices acceptable to God are? He resolves this question when he says: "The light of your countenance, O Lord, is sealed upon us"; as if to say: natural reason implanted in us teaches us to discern good from evil; and therefore he says, "The light of your countenance, O Lord, is sealed upon us," etc. The countenance of God is that by which God is known; just as a man is known by his face, this is the truth of God. From this truth of God there shines back a likeness of his light in our souls. And this is as it were a light, and it is sealed upon us, because it is the highest thing in us, and is as a certain sign upon our faces, and by this light we can know the good. Ps. 88: "In the light of your countenance they shall walk," etc. Moreover, we are sealed with the sign of the Spirit. Eph. 4: "Do not grieve the Holy Spirit, in whom you have been sealed." And also with the sign of the cross, whose seal has been impressed upon us in Baptism, and we ought daily to impress it. Song 8: "Set me as a seal upon your heart."

[86809] Then when he says, "You have given," he sets forth his preeminence over those sinners in goods: as if they were saying to him, you exhort us regarding your benefits, but we have everything; therefore he compares temporal things with spiritual things. And first he sets forth the spiritual; second the temporal, at "From the fruit," etc. Third the preeminence of spiritual things, at "In peace," etc. He says, therefore: it is true that all have the light of the countenance from above upon them, but, O Lord, to the saints and to me you have given gladness, namely spiritual gladness, in my heart, so that I may rejoice in you. Rom. 14: "The kingdom of God is not food and drink, but justice and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit": and this is a spiritual benefit. The wicked, however, have an abundance of temporal things; and therefore he says: "From the fruit of their grain, wine, and oil, they are multiplied," that is, enlarged. And by all these temporal goods, all others are understood: because all are ordered to the necessity of living: and so grain stands for food, wine for drink, and oil for condiment. Another reading has "from the time of their grain"; where a twofold deficiency of these goods is implied, because temporal things are so named from time. Wis. 2: "For the passing of a shadow is our time." And because one thing does not suffice, they must be many; therefore he says, "they are multiplied."

[86810] Then when he says, "In peace," he sets forth the preeminence of spiritual things; as if to say, what among these excels? The certain gladness of the heart. And this is clear for a twofold reason. First, because this good will be eternal, but that is temporal; second, because it is one and simple, while that is manifold. The second he sets forth at "For you, Lord, singularly," etc. He says, therefore, "In peace," etc.: as if to say: others in time, but not I; rather, "in the selfsame." Note, therefore, that even in the present life the just man is said to stand in the good for four reasons. First, because he is not impeded from without: and therefore he says, "in peace." Is. 32: "My people shall sit in the beauty of peace," etc. Second, from the unchangeableness of the things possessed, because this always remains the same; hence "in the selfsame." Ps. 121: "Jerusalem, which is built as a city, whose participation is in the selfsame." Third, because without anxiety: hence, "I shall sleep." Song 5: "I sleep," etc. Fourth, from rest from the labor of acquiring; hence he says, "and I shall rest." And this can exist even here in the present life according to its beginning; because the saints have all these things here in some measure in God; but all these things will be perfectly in the fatherland. And this I have, says David, because I have one thing in which all these are found: and this is what he says, "For you, Lord," etc.: as if to say, in one way in a certain singular hope; "you have established me," namely in eternal life, of which it is said below in Ps. 26: "One thing I have asked of the Lord," etc. And this responds against what he says, "they are multiplied": so that "for you, Lord," etc., is as if to say, in you singularly I hope. And this better fits the reading of Jerome, which says: "For you, Lord, have made me dwell specially in safety." Ps. 117: "It is good to trust or to hope in the Lord," etc.
