Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 20
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 20

[86949] Above, in the preceding Psalm, a petition was made for the exaltation of the king: but here, as though heard, he foretells it. The title is "Unto the end, a Psalm of David." This Psalm is therefore divided into two parts. In the first he foretells the exaltation of the king. In the second, the casting down of enemies, at "Let your hand be found." Concerning the first he does three things. First he foretells the joy of the king. Second he sets forth the cause of the joy, at "The desire." And third, the merit of the cause, at "For the king hopes in the Lord." This Psalm is expounded of Christ who is king, and of David who was his figure; and therefore it can be expounded of both: of Christ according to truth, of David according to figure. There is therefore a twofold joy: one concerning God, another concerning God's benefit. As to the first he says: O Lord God the Father, "the king," that is, Christ, "shall rejoice in your strength," that is, of your divinity: Ps. 71: "O God, give your judgment to the king." And he then rejoiced when he conquered the Devil and death by his own death: and when he worked miracles, and when he ascended into heaven: Ps. 46: "God has ascended with jubilation": Jer. 23: "A king shall reign and be wise," etc. 1 Cor. 1: "Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God." Likewise if this is said of David: O Lord God, "the king," namely David and other saints, "shall rejoice in your strength": Song 1: "We will rejoice and exult in you, mindful of your breasts." As to the second he says, "And over your salvation," etc., that is, over the attainment of salvation accomplished through you. Especially Christ will exult through this, that through him you save the human race: Mt. 1: "He himself shall save his people."

[86950] "The desire." Here the cause of the joy is set forth, which is the fulfillment of desire: Prov. 13: "A desire fulfilled delights the soul." As desire relates to joy, so does motion relate to rest, which is reached through motion. Hence first the fulfillment of desire is set forth. Second, the things in which the desire is fulfilled are set forth, at "For you have anticipated him." Now there is a twofold desire: one which is only in the heart, another which is expressed by the mouth: and both are fulfilled, because God hears even before one prays. As to the first he says, "You have granted him the desire of his heart": Lk. 22: "With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you"; and this is said of every just man. As to the second he says, "And you have not defrauded him of the will of his lips," that is, what he expressed through his lips: you have not defrauded him, because you heard him: Heb. 5: "He was heard because of his reverence": Is. 46: "My counsel shall stand, and all my will shall be accomplished."

[86951] "For." Here he sets forth the things in which the desire is fulfilled. And first he speaks of the fulfillment of the desire of the heart. Second, of the fulfillment of the desire of prayer, which is the same as the desire of the lips, at "the life." Now there is a twofold benefit; and therefore first he sets forth the interior spiritual benefit, which is the benefit of grace: and as to this he says, "For you have anticipated him with blessings of sweetness." To bless is to speak good; and the speaking of God is his doing. Hence in the blessing of God is understood the infusion of goodness: Gen. 26: "I will bless you, and I will multiply your offspring," etc. And 17: "I will bless him, and I will multiply him, and I will increase him exceedingly." This blessing therefore is sweet: Wis. 12: "O how good and sweet is your spirit within us." Therefore "with blessings of sweetness," that is, with the goods of grace and with immunity from sins, "you have anticipated him," that is, Christ, in time: because from the beginning of his conception he was full of every grace: Jn. 1: "We saw him full of grace and truth, as the only-begotten of the Father": because as soon as he was conceived he was united to the divine nature, and just as soon was he full of grace. Likewise, "you have anticipated him" in quantity: because above all others he received grace, and not by measure. The saints too are said to be anticipated: 1 Jn. 4: "Not as though we have loved God, but because he first loved us": Wis. 6: "He anticipates those who desire him." And so in the figure of Christ, David was anticipated by special grace: because he was anointed king while he was still a boy, before he himself thought of the kingdom. The exterior benefit he shows by saying, "You have set upon his head a crown of precious stone." If these words refer to Christ, then the sense is: "You have set upon his head a crown of precious stone," etc., that is, you have made him king. The crown is the sign of royal dignity: because, as it says in Is. 33: "They shall see the king in his beauty": Song 3: "Go forth, O daughters of Zion, and see the king in the diadem with which his mother crowned him," that is, his divinity. On account of this he says "of precious stone," that is, of divinity: because his kingdom is not of this world, Jn. 18. Jerome has "of pure gold," that is, the purest: Rev. 6: "A crown was given to him." Or the crown of precious stone is the apostles: who are called precious stones on account of the preciousness of their teaching: Rev. 12: "On his head," namely Christ's, "a crown of twelve stars." Sir. 25: "The crown of the aged is great experience." Hence the company of the apostles is like a crown of Christ. Or, "you have set upon his head a crown," that is, the Church: Prov. 12: "A diligent woman," that is, the Church, "is a crown to her husband," that is, to Christ. Or this can be said of any saint: because the crown, or reward, is God himself: Is. 28: "In that day the Lord shall be a crown of glory." "Of stone," on account of its solidity, "precious," because David was literally crowned by God himself. Next he shows how the petition of his lips is fulfilled: hence he says, "He asked life of you," when he asked you for the resurrection: Ps. 40: "But you, O Lord, have mercy on me, and raise me up, and I will repay them." And this was given to him: Ps. 2: "Ask of me, and I will give you the nations as your inheritance": Lk. 11: "Everyone who asks receives." Likewise every saint also asks for this, namely life, and especially eternal life: Ps. 26: "One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I seek," etc., and David likewise asks for this. Second, it is shown how the petition is fulfilled with regard to others; hence he says, "You have granted him," etc. He asked that his body, namely the Church, be preserved "in length of days": and God granted him this. Mt. 28: "Behold, I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the age." David also asked for this, in 2 Kgs. 7: "Moreover he spoke concerning the house of his servant for a long time to come."

[86952] "Great." Here the consummation of goods is set forth: and concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the magnification of this anticipated king, in whom the blessing was begun. Second he explains the greatness, at "glory and great beauty." I say that you have anticipated him, etc., but still more: because "his glory," namely of Christ and of man, "is great in your salvation," that is, in the Word to which human nature was united. Or, "great is his glory" among men: and this "in your salvation," because you raised him up: Heb. 5: "In the days of his flesh, prayers and supplications," etc. Or "great is his glory in your salvation," that is, in your help: in which it was established that he should have great glory; and he explains this in three ways. First, by comparison with himself; and therefore he says, "You have laid upon him glory and great beauty," which beauty was laid upon Christ in his resurrection, and glory in the admiration of others. Or, taking them as the same thing, "you have laid upon him glory and great beauty": Job 40: "Adorn yourself with beauty, and raise yourself up on high, and be glorious." Second, in comparison with others; hence he says, "For you shall give him to be a blessing forever and ever," because through him blessing was derived to all others: Gen. 22: "In your seed all nations shall be blessed." Third, in comparison with God; hence he says, "You shall make him joyful in gladness with your countenance," that is, he makes Christ the man joyful with everlasting joy: and "with your countenance," that is, in the vision of your face: Ps. 15: "You shall fill me with joy with your countenance." Or he laid glory upon him when he gave his saints the power to work miracles: and this is attributed to Christ, because it was all done for the glory of Christ, namely that he blessed them, and that he brought them to his own vision: Is. 66: "You shall see, and your heart shall rejoice": Jn. 16: "Your joy no one shall take from you."

[86953] "For." Above the Psalmist announced the exaltation of Christ the king; here he declares the merit of this: and this merit is that Christ, insofar as he is man, and every just person, places his hope in God alone: Jer. 17: "Blessed is the man who trusts in the Lord, and the Lord shall be his confidence." And therefore, because he hoped in the Lord, "he shall not be moved": Ps. 124: "Those who trust in the Lord," etc. Because hope in God is a firm foundation: 1 Mac. 2: "All who hope in him shall not be weakened." Therefore this is compared to an anchor. But it should be noted that there are three things that ought to move us to hope in the Lord. First, divine providence. A man does not usually hope in those to whom his care does not pertain. But our care pertains to God; therefore he says "he hopes in the Lord," whose task it is to govern. Second is mercy: Lk. 1: "His mercy is from generation to generation." Third is power; and therefore he says "of the Most High": Ps. 90: "He who dwells in the aid of the Most High."

[86954] "Let your hand be found." Above the Psalmist foretold the exaltation of the king; here he treats of the casting down of enemies: and concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the casting down of enemies. Second he draws a conclusion, at "Be exalted." Concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes the punishment of enemies. Second, their guilt, at "For," etc. Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the infliction of punishment. Second, the punishment itself, at "You shall make them," etc. The one who inflicts punishment is the hand of God; hence he says, "Let your hand be found by all your enemies." Jerome has "Let the right hand of God find his hating enemies"; but this seems to be a repetition by the Psalmist, because the hand and the right hand of God are the same, as are enemy and one who hates. And this is customary in the Psalms. Or if a distinction is made, every right hand is a hand; but not every hand is a right hand. By the "hand" of God, therefore, is understood the operative power of God: and this is a certain "right hand" by which he exalts the good in spiritual goods. Prov. 3: "Length of days is in her right hand." The "left hand" is that by which he punishes the wicked and bestows temporal things. Ibid.: "In her left hand are riches." He says therefore, "your hand," that is, your power, "let it be found," that is, let it deliver at will, all enemies. Is. 9: "In all these things his fury is not turned away, but his hand is still stretched out." "And your right hand"; because the fact that God punishes the wicked pertains to the right hand, insofar as such punishment is ordered to the salvation of the elect. So therefore, insofar as he punishes the wicked, it is called the "hand"; and insofar as it is ordered to the good of the just, it is called the "right hand." Or the right hand is Christ, and the hand as well; hence, "your hand," that is, Christ, "let it be found," that is, let it be known for good by those who are your friends, namely the nations. Rom. 10; Is. 65: "They found me who did not seek me." Or for evil: "Let it be found," etc., that is, let it be known by your enemies, that is, the Jews, in the judgment, when he comes to judge. Lk. 21: "They shall see the Son of Man coming," etc. "And your right hand," that is, your Son, "shall find," that is, punish, "all who hate you."

[86955] "You shall make them." Here the punishment of the enemies is set forth. And first as to the evils inflicted upon them; second as to the goods taken from them, at "their fruit." He sets forth a threefold order of punishment: and if it is referred to the mystery, it is clear: because in the future judgment there will be three things. First there will be a fire burning the surface of the world. Ps. 96: "He shall set fire around his enemies": therefore he says, "You shall make them like a furnace of fire," namely, "in the time of your countenance," that is, of Christ, at which time he will appear for judgment. Ps. 16: "From your countenance let my judgment come forth," etc. And he says "like a furnace," as though oppressed by fire on every side. Mt. 6: "Like the grass which today is, and tomorrow is cast into the furnace." Or "like a furnace," that is, containing fire within itself; and by this is understood the fire that the wicked will suffer interiorly from evil desire and anger. A good affection is a good fire. Lam. 1: "From on high he sent fire into my bones," etc. An evil affection is an evil fire. Ps. 57: "Fire has fallen upon them, and they have not seen the sun," that is, they always burn in the conscience of their impiety. Hos. 7: "All adulterers like a furnace heated by the baker." All who join themselves to anything other than God in a disordered way are adulterers. The baker is the Devil, who supplies evil thoughts: just as a baker supplies wood. Lam. 5: "Our skin is scorched like a furnace because of the storms of famine." And this "in the time of your countenance," that is, in the time of your manifestation for judgment. Second is set forth the debate of the judgment: in which he will reproach the wicked for their sins, and pronounce the sentence of damnation, whether vocally or mentally. And therefore "the Lord in his wrath shall trouble them," that is, he shall bring upon them the disturbance of sorrow over the evils inflicted and the goods taken away; third, they shall be enveloped by fire: hence, "and fire shall devour them." Job 20: "A fire that is not kindled shall devour them," namely, not by human breath; but it shall be kindled by divine power: hence Jerome has "you have cast them down." All these things can be applied quite fittingly to David.

[86956] "Their fruit." Here the deprivation of goods is set forth. The goods that men have in this world are of two kinds: some by which men desire to enjoy themselves in this life, and some they wish to leave behind them: and they shall lose both. And therefore, as to the first he says, "You shall destroy their fruit from the earth," which they sought to enjoy. Wis. 3: "Vain is their hope," etc. Rom. 6: "What fruit," etc. As to the second he says, "their seed," namely shall perish, "from among the children of men," namely from the company of the saints. Is. 14: "I will destroy Babylon," etc., and this happens because, as it says in Sir. 14: "Every corruptible work shall fail in the end." Wis. 3: "The nations of the wicked are of dire consummation," etc.

[86957] "For." Here the guilt of sinners is set forth, and it is described in two respects. First, as to the endeavor of their work; and as to this he says here: "For they have turned," etc.: because although they cannot accomplish it, still they endeavor as much as they can to inflict evils. Ps. 34: "They repaid me evil." Or, "they have turned," because the evils threatening them they wish to inflict on others. For a twofold evil was threatening the Jews: namely, the evil of punishment: and they tried to turn this upon Christ, when, lest the Romans take away their dominion, they killed Christ. Second, the evil of guilt was threatening them. Jn. 8: "You are of your father the Devil"; and they twisted this against Christ when they said, Jn. 8: "Do we not say rightly," etc. They themselves were possessed by demons, and they imputed sin to Christ. Second, the guilt of the Jews or of sinners is described as to the endeavor of thought: hence he says, "They devised plans," etc., that is, they planned to destroy his faith. Jer. 11: "They devised a plan," etc. Of this wood it is said in Wis. 14: "Blessed is the wood through which justice is done": but "they did not establish it," that is, they could not bring their plan to completion. Is. 8: "Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to nothing," etc. Why? "Because there is no counsel against the Lord," Prov. 21. And he assigns the reason for this statement, why they did not establish their counsel, saying "their back." Jerome's text is clearer: "For you shall set them as a shoulder, your boundaries firm against their face." It can happen in two ways that enemies do not establish their plans against someone. In one way, if they are conquered by him. In another way, if the boundaries of the one attacked are made firm; and therefore he says, they could not establish their plan: "For you shall set them as a back," that is, they shall flee before you. Likewise, "you shall make firm your boundaries against their face." This is understood spiritually of Christ, whose boundaries no one could breach. Jn. 10: "No one shall snatch them out of my hand." And in our text it reads, "In your remnants you shall prepare their countenance," that is, against their countenance, according to the Gloss. Above the Psalmist set forth the future punishment of the wicked; here he sets forth their present punishment. And there is a twofold spiritual punishment, which is in the soul: namely, according to aversion from God, and according to conversion to evil. As to the first he says, "You, according to your providence, shall set them as a back." As to the second he says, "In your remnants you shall prepare their countenance." And this is explained in many ways, according to the Gloss. In one way, concerning those things which Christ left behind, namely the temporal things he scorned. Jn. 18: "My kingdom is not of this world"; because in the desire for temporal things you shall leave their countenance, that is, you shall prepare their intention, so that on account of this they kill Christ, as when they said, Jn. 11: "Lest perhaps the Romans come," etc. Or "in their remnants," that is, in the nations which you leave to be converted. Rom. 15: "In him the nations shall hope." "You shall prepare their countenance," that is, the knowledge of you, which is "theirs," that is, of the Jews, that is, promised to them. Or the remnants of Christ are called the last things of his life, that is, his passion and death; and in these their evil intention toward his passion was prepared. Or the preparation of the countenance is for good, that is, "in the remnants" of the Jews who will be converted. Rom. 9: "The remnant shall be saved." And although they are set as a back for now, yet the remnant will be converted and will know.

[86958] "Be exalted." Here the conclusion is set forth. And first he asks for what pertains to God's part; second, he promises what pertains to our part. He says therefore, "Be exalted, O Lord, in your strength," so that in it the king may rejoice. Is. 26: "Let your hand be exalted, that they may not see, and let them be confounded." Yet according to the mystery: "Be exalted," O Christ, in the resurrection, which will be "in your strength." Jn. 10: "I have the power to lay down my life, and to take it up again," through the resurrection and ascension. "Be exalted," which will be "in your strength." Is. 63: "Walking in the greatness of his strength." And we "shall sing," namely interiorly, "and chant," exteriorly, "your mighty deeds." Or, "we shall sing," that is, we shall proclaim and announce the excellence of your power. 1 Pet. 2: "That you may declare his mighty deeds, who has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light."