Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 5
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 5

[86811] Above, the Psalmist set forth a prayer against those who persecute openly; here he prays against the deceitful, lest he be deceived. And concerning this he does two things. First, he sets forth a petition against the deceitful, lest he be deceived. Second, that the fallen may be restored, at "Lord, not in fury," etc. This Psalm has a title in which there is something new, and it reads thus: "Unto the end, for her who obtains the inheritance." Here a figure and a mystery are touched upon. The figure can be understood in two ways. First, according to the way the Gloss explains it, and as is found in the story of Gen. 21, that when Sarah saw Ishmael playing with her son Isaac, she was troubled and said to Abraham: "Cast out this handmaid and her son, for the son of the handmaid shall not be heir with my son Isaac." Sarah indeed understood that play to be a persecution against Isaac. Abraham, however, took it hard what Sarah had said about his son Ishmael; but God said to him: "Let it not seem harsh to you concerning the boy and your handmaid; in all that Sarah says to you, heed her voice, for in Isaac shall your seed be called," etc. As if to say: Isaac shall be your heir, not Ishmael. Hence below in chapter 25, it is said: "Abraham gave all that he possessed to his son Isaac, but to the sons of his concubines he gave gifts," etc. This Psalm can therefore be referred to this: that the people of the Jews, according to the figure, obtained the inheritance promised to Abraham, whose head and king was David. But according to the mystery, the Christian people obtain it: Gal. 4: "But we, brothers, are children of the promise according to Isaac." Therefore this Psalm tends unto the end, that is, unto Christ, whom it praises for her, namely for the Church, which obtains the inheritance, the synagogue having been rejected. In another way, according to the letter of Jerome, the title is: "For the leader, for the heirs, a song of David." And so it can be understood that this Psalm was composed for the victory that David had in the literal sense. And it should be known that David, while fleeing, lost his inheritance through Absalom, as is found in 2 Kgs. 16. Hence just as the preceding Psalm was for deliverance and victory against Absalom, so he composed this one for the recovery of his inheritance, because when David returned to Jerusalem, certain others had still maliciously risen up against him. Hence in 2 Kgs. 20, David commanded Amasa to summon all the men of Judah within three days to pursue Sheba the son of Bichri, "for the son of Bichri will afflict us more than Absalom." For he had passed through all the tribes of Israel as far as Abel, and all the chosen men had gathered to him; and when he was beheaded, David reigned over all Israel. In this Psalm, therefore, according to the literal sense, three things are considered. First, he asks to be heard. Second, he shows confidence in being heard, at "In the morning you will hear." Third, he sets forth his petition, at "Lord, lead me." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he asks to be heard. Second, he indicates the reason for being heard, at "My king." It should be noted that one who wishes to ask something of someone proceeds in this way. First, he desires what he wishes to ask. Second, he considers the words to be proposed. Third, he presents them before the hearer. And conversely, the hearer: first, perceives the words by hearing; second, grasps the meaning of the words by understanding; third, is inclined to fulfill the desire of the petitioner. David therefore speaks to God according to this likeness. And first he asks the first thing, namely that God hear his words with outward hearing, when he says, "Give ear to my words, O Lord." Second, he asks for understanding, namely the comprehension of his words, when he says, "Understand my cry" -- not an outward cry, but an inward affection: Ps. 17: "My cry before him." Jerome has: "Understand my murmuring, which I have thought to propose." And this agrees with the translation that says "meditation." Third, he asks the third thing, namely to be heard: "Attend to the voice of my prayer," that is, be willing to hear my prayer: Ps. 69: "O God, attend to my help." But does God do these things separately -- hear, attend, and answer? It must be said that he speaks metaphorically, namely that God may approve all these: the outward words, the inward meditation, and what he proposes. Second, he sets forth the reason for being heard, when he says, "My king." And this is the beginning of the verse according to the Greek. A threefold reason for being heard is given, namely on God's part. The first of these is "My king." For it belongs to a king to govern. Since therefore this pertains to God, it pertains to him to provide what is necessary: Jer. 10: "Who will not fear you, O king of nations?" The other reason is that he is God; for God is the end of our desires and our preserver: Ps. 27: "In God my heart has hoped, and I have been helped," etc. And therefore he says, "My God": Is. 8: "Shall not a people seek a vision from their God, for the living and the dead?" etc. The third reason is taken from the one praying, when he says: "For to you I will pray, O Lord"; as if to say: it is fitting, because you have promised a hearing to those who pray. Mt. 7: "Everyone who asks receives, and the one who seeks finds, and to the one who knocks it shall be opened." Nor does it matter that Jerome says "I beseech," while here it says "I will pray," because this designates the continuation of prayer without ceasing; as if to say: I will so pray that nonetheless I am always beseeching: Lk. 18: "One ought always to pray and not lose heart."

[86812] This is the second part of the Psalm. Here he first shows that he has confidence concerning being heard. Second, the reason for his confidence, at "In the morning I will stand before you," etc. He says therefore: "You will hear my voice in the morning"; according to the letter, that is, swiftly, as if to say, in good time. For we ought to hope this from God, that he will hear us quickly: Is. 30: "At the voice of your cry, as soon as he hears, he will answer you." Likewise in the penultimate chapter: "While they are yet speaking, I will hear." The reason for confidence is given when he says, "In the morning I will stand before you," etc. Note that "morning" is said in four ways: namely, of the natural day: Gen. 1: "There was evening and morning, one day." Also of human life; and so youth is called morning. Ps. 89: "In the morning it flourishes and passes away." Also of the day of grace, at the first conversion of a person to God, because then one begins to have the light of grace: Ps. 89: "We have been filled in the morning with your mercy." Also of eternity: Ps. 29: "In the evening," that is, in the present life, "weeping shall have place, and in the morning," that is, of eternity, "gladness." A twofold reason for confidence is therefore assigned. First, because he stands in the morning, that is, he clings to God and prepares himself for God; hence Jerome has "I will prepare myself": Sir. 18: "Before prayer, prepare your soul, and do not be like one who tests God." In the morning, therefore, of the day, that is, in the early hours, "I will stand before you," that is, I will attend to you. And this because then a person is free from anxieties and has a freer heart for thinking about God: Ps. 62: "In the morning hours, Lord, I will meditate on you": Is. 26: "But also with my spirit within me, from early morning I will keep watch for you, and you will hear my voice," etc. Because he hears the devout. In the morning, namely of grace, the darkness of sin having been driven away, "I will stand and contemplate," as Jerome's text has. 2 Kgs. 23: "Like the light of dawn in the morning, without clouds, the sun rises," etc. "You will hear my voice," namely by freeing from sin and punishment. Or "in the morning," namely on the day of eternity: Job 38: "Where were you when the morning stars praised me?" etc. And then a person is totally heard. Or "in the morning," that is, from youth: "I will stand before you": Lam. 3: "It is good for a man when he has borne the yoke of the Lord from his youth": Eccl. 12: "Remember your Creator in the days of your youth," etc. "You will hear my voice," because Prov. 8: "Those who love me, I love; and those who watch for me early will find me." The second reason for confidence is that he sees; hence he says, "And I will see." And he explains this first -- how he stands -- when he says, "But I, in the abundance." First he says what he sees, namely who are those who are prevented from being heard, and what are the obstacles of this sort; and these are the wicked. Hence he says, "I will see," namely "that God," etc. Here two things should be noted. First, that the wicked are excluded from these things. Second, that they are led into the evils of punishment, at "You hate all," etc. Concerning the first, he speaks of God as of a man who loves some and hates others. Here there can be a threefold degree: because the sin of one sinner pleases someone, the person of one sinning pleases another, and for yet another, neither pleases; but nevertheless one willingly and without indignation looks upon him. But this is not so with God, because sin does not please God, nor does he regard the familiarity of the sinner. Likewise, he disdains to look upon him. And therefore he says, as to the first, "I will see that you are not a God who wills iniquity," that is, it does not please you. As to the second, he says: "Nor shall the malicious dwell beside you," that is, you do not hold him in your familiarity: Ps. 100: "He shall not dwell in the midst of my house," etc. Likewise, Ps. 25: "I have hated the assembly of the malicious." As to the third, he says, "Nor shall the unjust," that is, sinners, "remain before your eyes," namely the eyes of approval: Hab. 1: "Your eyes are pure, and you cannot look upon iniquity."

[86813] Here he shows how they are led to punishment, and he sets forth a threefold order. For there is a threefold degree in the way someone hates another. First, he holds him in hatred, willing evil to him in his heart. Second, he carries this out by inflicting punishment. Third, if he has punished at some point, he nevertheless reconciles him to himself. But God first hates; hence he says, "You hate all," etc. Wis. 14: "Equally hateful to God are the impious man and his impiety." But against this, Wis. 11: "You love all things that are," etc. I respond: what God has made, he does not hate; but what he has not made, namely sin. But if we obstinately persist, he hates the sinner insofar as he does not call him back, and he orders him through punishments. Second, he inflicts punishment; and therefore he says: "You will destroy all who speak falsehood": Wis. 1: "The mouth that lies kills the soul." Note that falsehood is threefold: namely, pernicious, which is done to the harm of another, whether in spiritual or temporal matters, for example in teaching; and this is the most grave. Jocose, which is said for amusement. Officious, by which one speaks for the benefit of another, either temporally or spiritually. And according to Augustine, no officious lie is without sin, because if you lie to free someone, this is not good, for the Apostle says in Rom. 3: "Evil must not be done that good may come." Moreover, every evil could be done for the sake of good. Nevertheless, an officious lie can sometimes be venial. But a jocose lie is always venial. A pernicious lie, however, is always mortal; and it is of this that the text speaks here. Third, God hates in such a way that, inflicting punishments, he is not reconciled; hence he adds: "The man of blood and the deceitful one the Lord will abominate." We abominate those things that we do not tolerate in our awareness. Men of blood are called those whose desire is to shed blood: Prov. 1: "Their feet run to evil, and they hasten to shed blood": 2 Kgs. 16: "Go forth, man of blood." The deceitful one is he who speaks in deceit. But it should be noted that the Psalmist proceeds in an orderly way, because first a person simply works evil by thinking; and these God hates. But when they add malice by carrying it out, they provoke God to punish. But when they persist, then God abominates them: Prov. 17: "The life of the impious is an abomination to God," etc.

[86814] Next, when he says "But I," he shows how he stands before the Lord; and concerning this he does two things. First, he shows how he approaches God. Second, what prayer he offers, at "I will worship." Someone might therefore say to him: You say that the malicious one will not dwell beside you. But are you not a sinner? How then will you stand? And therefore he says, not according to my merits, but "in the abundance of your mercy I will enter," that is, I will draw near to you, "into your house." Or, in the literal sense, this means the temple, or the congregation of the faithful: 1 Tim. 3: "How one ought to conduct oneself in the house of God, which is the Church of God." Dan. 9: "For not on the basis of our justifications do we pour out our prayers before your face," etc. But since you are a sinner, that is, a man of blood, how do you approach or worship? Certainly "in your fear": Sir. 1: "He who is without fear cannot be justified"; therefore he says, "In your fear," that is, with reverence.

[86815] Above he asked that his prayer be heard; here he sets it forth. And first he prays for himself. Second, for others. Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth the prayer. Second, he gives its reason, at "For there is not." Concerning the first, he asks for two things: namely, to be led and to be directed; and this because a person in the world is as on a road: Is. 30: "This is the way; walk in it." But those who travel along a road need two things: because if the road is not safe, they need an escort; or a guide, if it is uncertain. In the world, enemies are on every side: Ps. 141: "On this road where I walked, they hid a snare for me." Likewise, the way is unknown: Job 3: "To the man whose way is hidden," etc. And therefore he first asks, "Lord, lead me in your justice," according to your justice, or that I may walk in your justice; and this "on account of my enemies": Ps. 142: "Your good spirit will lead me into the right land: for the sake of your name, O Lord, you will give me life in your equity." "Direct my way in your sight." Another translation has, "Direct in my sight your way." The first agrees with Jerome; the second with the Greek; but the meaning is the same. As if to say: Lord, I am on a hidden way: Prov. 14: "There is a way that seems right to a man, but in the end it leads to death." And therefore, "direct me in your sight," that is, according to your providence, because nothing is hidden from you. Or "in your sight," that I may always please you. Or "in my sight your way," so that it may always be in my heart, that I may always be able to follow you.

[86816] Then when he adds "For," he assigns the reason for the petition and describes the enemies and the imminent danger. First, from the lack of good. Second, from the abundance of evil, at "For their heart," etc. The deficiency is that if they kept peace, he could be at peace with them and proceed safely. But "there is no truth in their mouth," because they have one thing in their mouth and another in their heart: Hos. 4: "There is no truth." And therefore I cannot proceed safely. Likewise, from the abundance of evil. And first, as to their scheming, when he says: "Their heart is vain," that is, they meditate on vain things, which they cannot attain, namely to deceive the poor who are guarded by you: Sir. 2: "Many are the snares of the deceitful." Second, from their greediness, because "their throat is an open grave." The throat serves for taste and speech. In one way it can be read as explained according to its ordering to speech, as if to say: their throat is an open grave; for just as the grave is the place of the dead, and a stench comes forth from it, so their speech kills others, either spiritually or corporally: 1 Cor. 15: "Bad company corrupts good morals." Likewise, the words of such people are fetid, because they speak shameful things: Sir. 2: "The hearts of the foul-smelling belch forth." In another way, it can be explained with regard to eating and greediness; and this we can take either literally, and so they are an open grave because they are voracious. And on account of this, to satisfy their voracity, they flatter and act unjustly. Or figuratively: just as a grave, of itself, is prepared to receive the dead, so these people are always prepared to deceive: Jer. 5: "His quiver is like an open grave." Third, as to their oppression: "With their tongues," etc. As if to say: through smooth words they lead to death: Rom. 16: "Through smooth speech and flattery they seduce the hearts of the innocent": Jer. 9: "Their tongue is a wounding arrow," etc. This can be the prayer of the just and of the Church.

[86817] Next, when he says "Judge," he prays for others. And first, against the wicked. Second, for the good, at "And let them rejoice." Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he asks for their judgment. Second, he determines the mode of judgment, at "Let them fall," etc. Third, he assigns the cause of judgment, at "For they have provoked." He says therefore, "Judge them," since they are wicked. But it should be noted that judgment is twofold: namely, of discernment, by which even the good are judged: Ps. 42: "Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause," etc. Second, of condemnation: Jn. 3: "He who does not believe is already judged." Here he speaks of the judgment of condemnation, by which the wicked will be judged at the last judgment; hence Jerome has, "Condemn them, O God." But against this: Mt. 5: "Pray for those who persecute and slander you." I respond. It must be said that the prophets in their prophecy did not speak by their own will: 2 Pet. 1: "For prophecy was never brought forth by human will, but by the Holy Spirit," etc. And therefore what they uttered, they said according to their understanding of divine justice; and therefore these were predictions of future events rather than their prayers. Hence "judge" means "I know that you will judge." A twofold mode of justice is set forth. First, that they may fail in their purpose. Second, that they may be removed from their place. By the first, the evils they intend are prevented; and therefore he says, "Let them fall from their designs," that is, from their plans: Job 5: "Who catches the wise in their own craftiness," etc. Or "let them fall," that is, let them be punished on account of their thoughts: Rom. 2: "Of thoughts accusing," etc. But by the second, they are expelled from the company of the good; hence it follows: "According to the multitude," etc. This will be then when, as Mt. 25 says: "Depart, you cursed," etc. Job 18: "He will be driven from light into darkness," etc. And he says, "according to the multitude of their impieties," because the mode of condemnation will be according to them: Deut. 25: "According to the measure of the offense shall be the manner of the stripes." The cause is given: "For they have provoked," that is, they have provoked to wrath. This shows in God not anger, but the will to punish. Another reading has, "They have embittered you," who are sweet, by sinning against you obstinately. Sinners first sin, then they aggravate their sin by obstinacy, and then God does not spare but is provoked, that is, moved to vengeance: Rom. 2: "Do you not know that the kindness of God leads you to repentance? But according to your hardness": Deut. 32: "They have provoked me by that which is no god," etc.

[86818] Next, when he says "And let them rejoice," he sets forth the petition. And first he states it. Second, he adds the exposition, "Forever." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he states what he asks for, namely joy; hence he says, "Let them rejoice," for this is the end of all good things. Ps. 67: "Let the just feast and exult before God, and let them delight in gladness." Second, for whom he asks, namely for those who hope; hence, "Who hope in you." Next, when he says "Forever they shall exult," he explains. First, he says "Let them rejoice." Second, when he says "Let them hope," at "For you have blessed the just." For the joy of the saints in the homeland is everlasting; and therefore he says "forever"; and secure, hence he adds, "And you will dwell in them"; full, for which reason he adds, "And they shall glory," etc. It is indeed everlasting, not temporal: Is. 51: "Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads," etc. Secure, without disturbance: Is. 32: "My people shall sit in the beauty of peace and in tents of confidence." And therefore he says, "And you will dwell in them," as a protector; hence Jerome has, "And you will protect them": Rev. 21: "Behold, the tabernacle of God with men, and he will dwell with them." It is also full; and this is evident from four things. First, from the glory conceived thereby; hence "they shall glory," because no one glories in a thing unless he possesses it excellently. But the saints possess God most excellently; therefore he says, "They shall glory." Second, from the matter, because they glory in the fullest thing, and in every good: Jn. 16: "Until now you have asked nothing in my name; ask and you shall receive, that your joy may be full": Jn. 15: "That my joy may be in you," etc. And therefore he says, "In you." Third, from the companionship, because a person alone cannot rejoice well in something, but only when he has friends with him sharing in that good; and therefore he says, "All." Ps. 86: "The dwelling of all who rejoice is in you." Fourth, from the perfection, "who love"; for it is proper to friends to rejoice in the good of a friend, nor does a person easily let go of what he loves.

[86819] Next, when he says "For," he shows why they hope. First, because of the gift of grace. Second, from the mercy of predestination, etc. From the gift of grace, hence he says, "For you have blessed the just," namely by giving him a special grace: Eph. 1: "He blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places." And the mercy of predestination: Eph. 1: "We have been predestined according to the purpose of his will, who works all things in all." And this is what he says: "With the shield of your good will," that is, with the eternal will of his mercy, which from eternity disposed to save: Eph. 1: "He chose us before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and spotless." What he says, "as with a shield," implies that the very will of God is like a shield against all evils: 2 Kgs. 23: "The Lord is my shield and my strength," etc. Or here it is like a shield protecting, but in the homeland it is like a shield crowning. For it was the ancient custom of the Romans to use round shields, and in these they placed the hope of victory; and when they triumphed, they used the same shield as a crown. And hence the saints are depicted with a round shield on their heads, because having obtained a triumph over their enemies, they bear a round shield on their heads, after the manner of the Romans, as a crown. He says therefore: "With the shield of your good will you have crowned us"; as if to say, for the shield of our coronation we have your good will, which defends us here and crowns us there.
