Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 14
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 14

[86887] Above, the Psalmist treated of the malice and deceit of his adversaries; here he treats of his own justice. And first he shows what kind of justice God accepts. Second, as though giving thanks, he shows the nature of his own justice, at "preserve me." The title: "a Psalm of David." In this Psalm he does two things: for, standing before God as a priest, he consults God. First, the question is set forth. Second, the response, at "he who walks without blemish." He therefore sets forth a twofold question, because the state of the present Church and the future Church is twofold. The first is of those who are militant. Rev. 14: "From henceforth now, says the Spirit, let them rest." And these two states were signified in the Old Testament. For first they had the tabernacle, Ex. 26, as long as they had wars and labors. 2 Sam. 7: "When the Lord had given David rest from all his enemies round about, he said to Nathan: Do you see that I dwell in a house of cedar, and the ark of God is placed in the midst of skins?" Afterward he built the temple, when he had peace. By the tabernacle is designated the Church militant; by the temple built on the mountain, the state of the future life. And so he says, "who shall dwell in your tabernacle?" -- that is, in the present Church. As if to say: who is worthy to dwell there? For sinners dwell there in number, but not in merit. Jerome has: "who shall sojourn?" Ps. 67: "He makes those of one mind to dwell in a house." The second question: "who shall rest upon your holy mountain?" And it is called a holy mountain, because nothing defiled is there. Jer. 31: "The Lord bless you, O beauty of justice, O holy mountain." Is. 35: "It shall be called the holy way." Ex. 15: "You shall bring them in and plant them on the mountain of your inheritance, in your most firm dwelling place, which you, O Lord, have made."

[86888] "He who." Here the response is set forth, and concerning this he does two things. First he commemorates the merits of those who dwell in the aforesaid places, namely in the tabernacle and on the holy mountain of God. Second, the reward, at "he who does these things shall not be moved forever." He sets forth ten effects of the virtues. But the action of the virtuous person is considered in two ways. First, by comparison to himself. Second, by comparison to others. First he proposes those things by which a man works well in himself. Second, those by which he conducts himself well toward his neighbor, at "nor has he done evil to his neighbor," etc. In himself, with regard to outward matters, in deed and in speech. In deed, with regard to two things. First, that he should flee evil; and so he says: "he who walks without blemish." This life is a kind of road to eternal life; and so he says, "he walks," that is, he proceeds on the way. Ps. 41: "I shall enter into the place of the tabernacle." Likewise Ps. 118: "Blessed are the undefiled in the way." "Without blemish," namely mortal sin, because venial sin does not properly constitute a blemish. Sir. 31: "Blessed is the rich man who is found without blemish." But in Christ and in the Virgin Mary there was absolutely no blemish at all, and to these temperance is especially attributed, because one is stained by offenses against temperance. Second, that he should do good; and so there follows, "and works justice," that is, those things to which justice inclines. And these are reduced to justice insofar as it is a special virtue. In speech, first, that he should do good -- "who speaks truth," that is, who performs the good of speech. Is. 33: "Who among you can dwell with everlasting burnings? He who walks in justice and speaks truth." And he says, "in his heart," against those who speak truth by chance, not from deliberate intention. Prov. 12: "The lip of truth shall be steadfast." 1 Pet. 2: "Laying aside all lying and all deceit, as newborn infants." Second, that he should avoid evil, namely deceitfulness. Jer. 9: "Their tongue is a wounding arrow; it has spoken deceit." "He who has not practiced deceit with his tongue." Another reading: "who is not facile with his tongue." Prov. 25: "A city that lies open and without walls is a man who cannot restrain his spirit in speaking." Another reading: "and there is no accusation on his tongue" -- because he is neither a detractor nor a gossip; or because his words are not liable to accusation. Eph. 4: "Let no evil speech proceed from your mouth."

[86889] "Nor has he done." Above, the Psalmist treated of the virtuous action that God accepts, enumerating those things by which a man works well in himself; here he enumerates those by which he conducts himself well toward his neighbor. And here, with regard to his neighbor, he asks three things. First, that he not harm him. Second, that he not consent to one who does harm. Rom. 1: "Those who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God; and worthy of death are not only those who do them, but also those who consent to those who do them." Third, that he not deceive him. He says therefore, with regard to the first, "nor has he done evil to his neighbor," neither corporally nor spiritually. Rom. 12: "Rendering to no man evil for evil." Gal. 6: "While we have time, let us work good." With regard to the second, he says, "and he has not accepted reproach against his neighbors." Someone may say something against another, but it need not be sustained; and so he says, "he has not accepted reproach" -- that is, when one who hears detracting words against someone comes to detest the one spoken about, or himself repeats them to others. Sir. 19: "Have you heard a word against your neighbor? Let it die within you," etc. Sir. 28: "Hedge in your ears with thorns, and do not listen to a wicked tongue." Jerome: "If there is no listener, there is no detractor." Bernard: "To detract or to listen to a detractor -- which of these is more damnable, I would not easily say." Prov. 25: "The north wind drives away rain, and a sad countenance drives away a detracting tongue" -- because, literally, the detractor ceases when the listener shows displeasure.

[86890] "The malicious one is brought to nothing." Here he shows that one should not be contemptuous. In a man there are two things: vice and virtue. Vice is to be despised; and so he says the malicious person, insofar as he is such, "is brought to nothing," that is, is considered as nothing. And this is good: first, to remove emulation, for sometimes a wicked person is exalted. Jer. 12: "The way of the wicked prospers," etc. But on account of this, one should by no means consider him great, but ought to despise him. 1 Macc. 2: "The glory of a sinful man is dung and worms. Today he is exalted and tomorrow he shall not be found, because he has returned to his earth and his thought has perished." Or someone great intends to do harm; but since he is malicious, despise him, because the derogation of such persons is the approbation of our life. Ps. 26: "Though armies should stand against me, my heart shall not fear" -- that is, sinners. But the virtuous man you should consider great; and so he says, "those who fear the Lord he glorifies." Sir. 25: "How great is he who has found wisdom and knowledge! But there is none above him who fears the Lord." The Gloss expounds differently: "the malicious one is brought to nothing in his sight," that is, the Devil has been bound by him. 1 Jn. 2: "You have overcome the evil one," etc. "The Lord glorifies those who fear the Lord," namely Himself. But the first exposition is more literal.

[86891] Here he forbids deceiving one's neighbor. Now a neighbor is deceived in three ways: namely, in promises, and this through an oath. And so he says, "he who swears," etc. -- that is, he confirms something in order to deceive, because he does not keep it. Zech. 8: "Love not a false oath." Lev. 19: "You shall not swear falsely by the name of your God, nor shall you profane it." Swearing does not pertain to virtue, but keeping the oath does. Likewise, in contracts; hence: "he who has not lent his money at usury." Lk. 6: "Lend, hoping for nothing in return." "And he has not accepted bribes against the innocent." Prov. 17: "The wicked man accepts a bribe from the bosom," that is, of the Church, "to pervert the paths of justice." Deut. 23 forbids lending to a brother at usury, because the lender sells what does not exist, since he does not actually have the use of the thing. Likewise, in judgments, when one gives a sentence against the innocent; and so he says, "and bribes." Is. 5: "Woe to you who justify the ungodly for the sake of bribes." Job 15: "Fire shall devour the tabernacles of those who willingly accept bribes." Then the reward is set forth. "He who does," that is, observes, "these things," all the aforementioned. Jas. 1: "Be doers of the word." Rom. 2: "Not the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers." "He shall not be moved forever," that is, he shall dwell here on my holy mountain. Below, Ps. 124: "Those who trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion," etc. Ps. 54: "You shall never permit the just to waver."
