Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 42
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 42

[87219] In the preceding Psalm, David narrated his desire; now he applies prayer to fulfill that desire. And first he sets forth the prayer; second, its effect, at "why are you sorrowful?" Concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes the prayer in general; second, in particular, at "from the unjust man." And first he asks for judgment; second, the effect of the judgment. He asks therefore, "judge me, O God." But this seems to be presumptuous, because he himself says, "enter not into judgment," etc. Ps. 142. I respond. It must be said that there is a twofold judgment: namely, of severity and of mercy or equity. The first is when only the matter is attended to and not the condition of the person; and this is to be feared. Of this he says, Ps. 142: "Enter not into judgment," etc., because our acts of justice are nothing in the sight of God, as is said in Is. 64. And this judgment is without mercy, as is said in Jas. 2. The second is when not only the nature of the matter is considered, but the condition of the person. Ps. 102: "The Lord has had mercy on those who fear Him, for He knows our frame." And this is what he asks for. Or, alternatively, there is a twofold judgment: namely, of examination, when merits are scrutinized -- and this he does not ask for here, because the examination is to be feared. Job 9: "I feared all my works, knowing that you would not spare the offender." The other is of discrimination, namely, separation from the wicked; and this is what he asks for. And so he adds, "and distinguish my cause." And this refers to the present state: and thus we ask to be distinguished from the wicked, if not in place, at least in cause. For many things are common to us and to them, because place is a matter of fortune's lot, but cause is not -- because good and bad use the same circumstances differently, for in adversities the good shine through patience, while the wicked fume with impatience. But if we refer it to the future judgment, we ask to be distinguished, because the cause of the wicked shall be judged unto condemnation, and that of the good unto salvation. In particular, he asks to be judged with regard to two things: namely, with regard to deliverance from evil, and with regard to advancement in good. He asks therefore to be delivered from evil, whether present or future; hence he says, "from the unjust and deceitful man, rescue me." The "unjust man" is a name for the Devil. Mt. 13: "An enemy, a man, has done this." Or any other seducing man, or any unjust person. And he is called unjust because he openly intends injustice; deceitful, on account of hidden fraud. Prov. 12: "Deceit is in the heart of those who plot evil." From these, therefore, one is delivered in two ways. In one way, so as not to be seduced by hidden deceitfulness. In another way, so as not to be crushed by adversity. "Because you are my God." Here the reason for the deliverance is set forth; and it is twofold: one on God's part, who has the power; hence he says, "you are my strength." Is. 12: "My strength and my praise is the Lord." And He is called our strength effectively, because it comes from Him. Is. 40: "He gives power to the faint, and to those who have no strength He multiplies fortitude and vigor." The other reason is on his own part, namely the evils he suffers. Some evils we suffer according to opinion, because when we are in adversities we seem to be rejected by God; hence he says, "why have you rejected me?" But "the Lord will not cast off His people," Ps. 94. And so this evil is merely apparent. Another evil is real; hence there follows, "why do I go about in sadness?" Sad either with the sorrow of the world, which works death; and in this sense the meaning is: why do I go about in sadness, namely temporally, while the enemy, the evil man, afflicts me temporally. Or "I go about in sadness," with the good sorrow that works repentance unto salvation. And in this sense the meaning is: why do I go about in sadness only? Because joy should also be joined to repentance.

[87220] "Send forth." Here he sets forth advancement in good. And first he asks for the divine goods by which he is advanced; second, he asks for the advancement itself. He asks for two goods: light and truth. One arrives at God by steps of the mind and through knowledge. Heb. 4: "Entry is promised to those who believe." Two things are necessary for knowledge: namely, light and the object known. Eph. 5: "All that is made manifest is light." And so he asks for two things: namely, light and truth, to which I cannot attain by myself. And so he says, "send forth your light and your truth." Light and truth are the same thing here, because they are understood as referring to Christ. "Send forth your light," that is, Christ. Jn. 1: "He was the true light," etc. "And your truth," because Christ Himself is truth. Jn. 14: "I am the way, the truth, and the life." As if to say: God the Father, send forth Christ. Or light here is understood as the law, because Prov. 6: "The commandment of the Lord is a lamp, and the law is light." "And your truth," that is, the New Testament. Then the advancement in good is set forth. And he sets forth, first, the direction in approaching, at "they themselves have led me," namely, the light and the truth have led me to you. Or "they have led me," that is, they have drawn me away from evils and "have brought me to your holy mountain and into your tabernacles." This prayer corresponds to the desire of the preceding Psalm: "I shall pass over into the place," etc. And because this does not yet suffice, I ask to be brought by God to the mountain, etc. Jerusalem was at the foot of the mountain on the north side. And thus those who went there first arrived at the mountain. Second, they went to the dwelling place. Third, to the place of sacrifice, namely the altar. And even there my spirit does not rest, but ascends to God; and so he says, "they have brought me to your holy mountain and into your tabernacles," that is, to the dwelling place. And again the spirit does not rest there, but goes to the house of God, that is, to the altar. And so he says, "I will go in to the altar of God." And the spirit does not rest there either, lest it seem to be an idolater, but goes to God, "who gives joy to my youth." Mystically, however, by the mountain and the tabernacle the present Church is designated, or the heavenly Church. As if to say: they have led me into your Church. Is. 2: "The mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared on the top of the mountains," etc. And "tabernacles," that is, the diverse communities of saints, which are a kind of pilgrimages upon the earth; Heb. 11. And this Church is called the gate of heaven. Gen. 28: "This is no other but the house of God and the gate of heaven." And so it is also called the altar of God, that is, God Himself. Rev. 21: "God Himself is the temple," because all spiritual sacrifices are to be offered in God, not in any earthly thing. And there shall be joy. Is. 66: "You shall see, and your heart shall rejoice." Mt. 25: "Enter into the joy of your Lord." And so he says, "who gives joy to my youth," that is, there shall be renewal and youth, because, as is said in Eph. 4, "we shall all appear in the measure of the age of the fullness of Christ." And so he says "youth." Ps. 102: "Your youth shall be renewed like the eagle's." And priests say this Psalm when they approach the altar, because these two things, namely joy and renewal, are necessary for those who wish to approach the heavenly altar. Lev. 10: "How could he eat or please the Lord in sacred ceremonies with a sorrowful mind?" Likewise, there is no oldness of sin there. 1 Jn. 2: "I write to you, young men." Or everything that has been said refers to the heavenly homeland, in which we ought to stand in desire and toward which we ought to proceed with longing. And this is what he designates when he says, "to your holy mountain." Ex. 15: "You shall bring them in and plant them on the mountain of your inheritance," because there is stability of state there. Likewise, there is the fellowship of saints; hence he says, "and into your tabernacles." Num. 24: "How beautiful are your tabernacles, O Jacob," etc. Ps. 83: "How lovely are your tabernacles, O Lord of hosts." And they are called tabernacles because, although men are citizens by grace, nevertheless according to the condition of human nature they are guests there. Third, the altar designates the humanity of Christ. Is. 33: "They shall see the king in his beauty." And Christ is called the altar of God. Heb. 13: "We have an altar, from which they who serve the tabernacle have no power to eat." Because just as all carnal sacrifices were offered on the altar, so all prayers are offered through Christ. Hence every prayer ends with: "through Christ our Lord." But because there is no rest in His humanity, the soul reaches further to His divinity; hence he says, "to God," etc. Job 22: "You shall abound in delights from the Almighty, and you shall lift up your face to God." The effect of the prayer is the confession of praise; hence he says: "I will praise you upon the harp, O God." And he says this on account of the affection, because Is. 51: "Joy and gladness shall be found in her." And he says "upon the harp," to distinguish it from the psaltery; because the psaltery sounds from above, but the harp from below. Hence, "I will praise upon the harp," because we have been delivered from the evils of the world. And upon the psaltery, because we have obtained those joys from above. "Why are you sorrowful?" etc. All that follows has been expounded above in the preceding Psalm.
