Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 52
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 52

[87296] "The fool has said." Above, the Psalmist rebuked the wickedness of sinners from the side of their affection for sin; here he rebukes their wickedness from their contempt of God. The title: "Unto the end, for understanding, of David, for Amalek." The history of this is found in 1 Sam. 30, when David, fleeing, came to Achish, king of the Philistines, who gave him the city of Ziklag, and it happened that the Amalekites, in his absence, burned the city; eventually David pursued them and recovered the spoil. Mystically, by David is signified Christ; and as the Gloss says, the Amalekites -- "a people licking blood" -- signify the Antichrist and his followers, who with affection "lick" carnal things. Mt. 16: "Flesh and blood," etc. Therefore, as their malice is interpreted, from this they are led against Christ. Augustine says "for Maeleth," which is interpreted as "suffering and giving birth"; and it signifies the Church, of which Jn. 16 says: "A woman, when she is in labor, has sorrow," etc.; and so the Psalm is for the tribulations which the Church suffers from the evils of the world. And this, therefore, is through Korah, who was one of the chief singers; and so this Psalm was sung by his ministry. Likewise it should be known that this Psalm was set forth above at Psalm 13; yet the context is not the same, nor are all the verses, and there it is introduced on account of the first coming of Christ, here on account of the coming of Christ for judgment. And concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the malice of sinners. Second he introduces the divine judgment, at "The Lord from heaven." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the root of evil, namely contempt. Second he shows what follows from such a root, at "They are corrupt." It should be known that wisdom, if properly understood, differs from knowledge, because wisdom is about the knowledge of divine things, while knowledge is about the knowledge of human things. The foolish man despises the knowledge of divine things. Job 21: "Depart from us, and we desire not the knowledge of your ways." Rom. 1: "Their foolish heart was darkened," etc. Therefore "the fool has said"; that is, he has despised God and the knowledge of God; and he did this "in his heart," he said: "There is no God." Against this, Anselm says that no one can think that God does not exist. It must be said that something can be unknown to us in two ways. In one way, on its own account; in another way, on our account. In the first way, those things are unknown to us which have their primary existence, such as contingent things, prime matter, motion, and time. In the second way, those things are unknown to us which exceed our knowledge. I say, therefore, that if we consider God according to himself, it cannot be thought that he does not exist, and no proposition is more known than one whose predicate is included in the subject. The existence of God is his essence, and therefore this proposition, "God exists," is maximally self-evident; yet as regards us, the essence of God is not known to us, but is made known to us through his effects. And from this it is the case that whoever denies certain effects of God -- for example, his providence over good and evil men and all things universally, and the miracles of God, and that he is omnipotent -- denies God, and says in his heart -- because it is from God in the hearts of all that God exists -- what no one indeed wishes: he is considered a fool for saying that God does not exist. Or "the fool," that is, the Jew. Ps.: "Understand, you fools"; who said that Christ is not God. Jn. 10: "You, being a man, make yourself God."

[87297] "They are corrupt." Here is the effect of their malice. Just as fear, knowledge, and love of God is the principle of every good work, so when knowledge and love of God are removed, all good life is taken away. And first he shows what follows as to the doing of evil; second, as to the loss of good. There are two evils that follow. The first is that "they are corrupt." The body is corrupted through the evaporation of natural heat and through the withdrawal of actual exterior heat. The natural heat of the human soul is God himself; and therefore, as long as knowledge of God is in the soul, the soul retains its form which God impressed upon it, namely innocence and the divine image; but when this heat evaporates and actual heat is withdrawn -- namely the heat of concupiscence and of fear -- the soul is corrupted, and consequently it follows that many cast off fear and love and the knowledge of God from themselves and are corrupted in impurities; and therefore "they have become abominable in their iniquities." Hos. 9: "They became abominable like the things they loved." And he says "iniquity," that is, on account of their iniquities, and they also lose what is good. "There is not one who does good." Jer. 4: "They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge."

[87298] "He has looked down from heaven." Here the judgment of God against the wicked is set forth. And first the consideration of the judge is introduced. Second, what the judge finds is shown: "All have turned aside." Third, the sentence is added: "Shall they not know?" The reason they deny God is that they believe that because of his loftiness God does not look upon the lowest things. Job 22: "Do you not think that God is higher than heaven?" etc. "You say, what? He judges through the darkness; he walks about the poles of heaven; and he does not consider our affairs." But it pertains to the perfection of his wisdom that he looks upon all things. Ps.: "Who is like the Lord our God, who dwells on high and looks upon the lowly in heaven and on earth?" And therefore he says that "the Lord has looked down from heaven," that is, he considers "the children of men" from his loftiness. Sir. 16: "What is my soul in so vast a creation?" Prov. 16: "All the ways of man are open to his eyes." Ps.: "The Lord has looked down from heaven upon the earth." Or "from heaven," that is, from Christ. Or from the soul of the just man. He inquires among the children of men "to see if there is one who understands, or who seeks God." There is a difference between God and man: human judges inquire into what is done outwardly, but God looks upon the heart. Ps.: "God searches the hearts and minds."

[87299] "In the heart." There are two things that must be done concerning God, namely that the intellect be fixed inwardly upon the knowledge of God and that the affection tend toward God as toward its end. Hence he says he looks down in order to see "if there is understanding." And if it is understood of the just man, in sweetness correcting; but if it is understood of the wicked man, as it is said of him, "he would not understand in order to act well," so it is "seeking," namely, intending to bring him to himself. Ps.: "Seek the Lord, and your soul shall live," etc. But the Lord, looking down to see this, finds malice abounding.

[87300] "All have turned aside." And first he touches upon the departure from the root. Second he says what follows from this. And concerning this he explains. He says, therefore, he inquires here, but he finds that "all have turned aside, together they have become useless"; and again, "there is none who does good." From the understanding and seeking of God "all have departed." Is. 53: "Each one has turned aside to his own way." From this it follows that they are useless, both to themselves and to others. For those who do not have the love of God do not have true faith; whatever works of a good kind they do, they are useless to themselves for the reward of eternal life. Therefore he says, "Together they have become useless," that is, they have done useless works. 1 Cor. 13: "If I distribute all my goods to feed the poor," etc. Is. 14: "Cast out from your tomb," etc. And he explains how they are useless: because "there is none who does good," because those things which are not done in the power of faith and are not informed by the love of God are not good simply. Rom. 14: "Whatever is not from faith is dead." And that they have turned aside he shows when he says, "There is none, not even one," that is, not even one is found to be good. But is there no one good in the whole universe? It must be said that in one way, if it refers to the company of the wicked, no one is good. In another way, universally, "there is none, not even one," that is, up to Christ there is no one who is good by his own power. Phil. 2: "God who works in us."

[87301] "Shall they not know," etc. Above, the Psalmist introduced the judge looking upon iniquity and uselessness. Here he treats of the sentence of judgment. And first as to the condemnation of the wicked. Second as to the salvation of the good, at "Who shall give," etc. Concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes the question. Second he makes the proposal clear, at "Because God will scatter." Concerning the first he does two things. First he investigates the defect of penance itself. Second he assigns the merit of punishment, at "Who work." Concerning the first, it should be considered that it frequently happens that in a state of prosperity men do not acknowledge God, but through punishments inflicted by God they remember that God exists; as if to say, this is necessary because of their guilt. Ps.: "The Lord will be known by the judgments he executes." And we have an example of this in Pharaoh. Ex. 5: "I do not know the Lord." And after the inflicted punishments the Egyptians said: "Let us flee from Israel, for the Lord fights for them against us." It was said above that "the fool has said, there is no God," and for this reason he says: "Shall not all who work iniquity know," at least through punishments, "that God exists?" As if to say: indeed they will know, because no one can inflict punishments except God. And this is very necessary because of the guilt they have committed. And they have committed a twofold guilt, namely in deed and in affection. The guilt is the working of iniquity; and therefore he says, "Who work iniquity." Iniquity properly is sin against one's neighbor, because it is opposed to equity. He aggravates this guilt when he says, "Who devour my people as the food of bread." The food of bread is habitual and delightful; as if to say, those men delightfully persevere in their malice and take delight in inflicting injuries. Mic. 3: "They have eaten the flesh of my people and their corpses, and have taken away their goods." Jer. 50: "The first, the king of Assyria." As to the affection, he says, "They have not called upon God." Sinners are disordered in their affection in two ways. First, through contempt of God. Second, through disordered love of temporal things. As to the first, he says, "They have not called upon God," for two reasons. First, because they do not believe in God. Rom. 10: "How shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed?" Second, because they believe they are sufficient by themselves. Ps.: "Our lips are our own." As to the second, he says, "There they trembled where there was no fear"; as if to say, from this cause they feared where there is nothing to fear. By the word "there" he designates not a place but a cause. Hence Augustine says that fear is caused by love. Those men, namely the wicked or sinners, have only love of temporal things; and therefore they fear only temporal losses -- that is, "for that cause" where there is nothing to fear, that is, for which there is nothing to fear. Mt. 10: "Do not fear those," etc.; and therefore there is nothing to fear in the loss of temporal things, because in them there is not properly our true good; and it is certain that if we would cling to God, he would give us even these things. Mt. 6: "Seek first the kingdom of God," etc.

[87302] "Because God has scattered." Here he makes clear the question of how correction takes place, that is, through punishment. And he introduces a twofold punishment, namely interior and exterior. He shows the first when he says, "God has scattered the bones of those who please men," that is, who ultimately desire to please men. By "bones" is understood strength. This strength is either bodily -- and this is consumed by God -- or spiritual -- and this is consumed by sin. These bones are the virtues of good men; hence on the cross the bones of Christ were not broken. But the bones of the thieves were crushed. But he says, "Of those who please men." Is it wrong to please men? It seems not. 1 Cor. 10: "Be without offense," etc. Likewise, "I please all in all things," says the Apostle. It must be said that if someone wishes to please another for the sake of vain glory, that is, to have human glory, this is wrong in those who place their end in this, because such men confidently sin in secret provided they please in public. But sometimes someone wishes to please others in order to draw them to God; and in this way such pleasing is meritorious and good; and it was in this way that the Apostle wished us to please others, and in this way he himself pleased. The contrary is set forth as the exterior punishment: hence he says, "They are confounded," that is, let them be confounded, because their sins are uncovered. Job 20: "The heavens shall reveal his iniquity," because they have deceived, and because they shall lose the temporal things through which they believed they had happiness. Jer. 20: "They shall be greatly confounded." Jer. 17: "Let those who persecute me be confounded." And they shall suffer this "because God has despised them." Those are honored whom God loves. Ps.: "But to me your friends are exceedingly honored," etc. But those whom God has despised are confounded.

[87303] "Who shall give from Zion?" Here he treats of the good. And first the question is proposed. Second, the answer. The question is this: Who, going forth from Zion, shall save Israel? Who? Christ, because "salvation is from the Jews": therefore from Zion, that is, from the Jews, and from David, and from the upper room of Zion where the apostles received the Holy Spirit, the preachers of salvation went forth. And this none shall give but God. And in what way? "When he shall have turned back the captivity of his people." For the faithful people was held in captivity, that is, in the prison of the Devil, which God turned back when he released them. Ps.: "Turn back, O Lord, our captivity," etc. And what shall follow from this? Joy and gladness. Ps.: "When the Lord turned back the captivity of Zion, we became," etc. But there is a twofold state of the faithful, namely of struggle and of the crown, of merit and of reward; and in both there is joy. And the first is joy from the participation of grace. Rom. 14: "The kingdom is justice." And therefore he says, "Jacob shall exult." 1 Sam. 2: "My heart has exulted," etc. In the reward there is joy, says the Gloss. Is. 35: "Everlasting gladness," etc. And therefore he says, "Israel shall be glad."
