Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 51
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 51

[87291] Here begins the second group of fifty. And as was said at the beginning of the book, the first fifty pertains to the penitent; this second fifty pertains to those who are making progress. Concerning these, three things are to be seen in order: for the first degree of those making progress is justification; the second degree is the exercise of good works; the third is the consideration of divine works. And so this group of fifty is divided into three parts. First he treats of those things that pertain to justification; second he treats of those things that pertain to the execution of good works, at "O God, your judgment"; third he treats of those things that pertain to the consideration of divine works, at "God has stood." In justification two things are necessary: namely, a turning away from sin and a turning toward God. And so, by way of opposition, there are two things in sin: namely, a turning away from God and a turning toward sin. First, therefore, he sets forth Psalms that pertain to the aversion and detestation of sin; second, he sets forth Psalms that constitute or contain subjection to God, at Ps. 61: "Shall not my soul be subject to God." Concerning the first he does two things. First he shows the malice of sinners; second he shows the evils that are done by sinners. Sin is aggravated by two things: namely, by the affection for sinning, and by contempt of God. First, therefore, he aggravates the malice of sinners from the first; second, he aggravates their malice from the second, at Ps. 52: "The fool has said." The title: "Unto the end, for understanding, of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and reported to Saul: David has come into the house of Abimelech." This history is found in 1 Sam. 21 and 22, when David, fleeing from Saul, came to Nob where the priests were, and received the sword of Goliath and the loaves of proposition, and Doeg the Edomite was present, who was powerful among the shepherds; and when Saul complained that no one would fight for him against David, this Doeg reported how Abimelech the priest had received David and given him the sword of Goliath and the loaves of proposition: and so Saul in his wrath ordered all the priests to be killed. And when the others were unwilling to lay hands upon the priests to kill them, this Doeg killed all the priests. But there is a discrepancy between the title and the history, because the chief priest in the history is called Achimelech, but in the title Abimelech. And the Gloss says that this happened through the fault of the copyists, or on account of the mystery: for by David is signified Christ, both because he exercised the office of royal dignity and also because he exercised the dignity of the priesthood by eating the loaves of proposition. Doeg is interpreted as "mute"; Edomite as "earthly"; Saul as "petition"; Abimelech as "the kingdom of my father." By Doeg, therefore, who was moved by earthly things, when David came -- that is, Christ -- to Abimelech -- that is, to the Jews, which is "the kingdom of my father" -- he reported to Saul, that is, to death, that the wicked summoned it by their hands and words and killed him. Or Doeg, that is, the Antichrist, who at the end of the world will stir up the earthly. When Christ came into the Church, he reported to the Devil, that he will persecute the Church. And principally this entire Psalm is understood of the wicked who persecute Christ, either in himself or in his members. This Psalm is divided into two parts. In the first he treats of the malice of the sinner who is attached to iniquity. Second, he treats of the justice of the saints, at "But I am like a fruitful olive tree." Concerning the first he does two things. First he treats of the guilt of the wicked. Second, of their punishment, at "Therefore God will destroy you." It should be known, moreover, that in a man who is attached to sin, three things follow in order. The first is delight in sin. The second is thinking about sin, because we think about the things we love. The third is glorying in the perpetration of sin. Everyone naturally rejoices when he does what he loves. So then he proceeds from the last. First, concerning the glory of the wicked in the act of sin. Second, concerning thinking about sin, at "All day long." Third, concerning the love of sin, at "You have loved." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the power of certain ones for doing evil. Second he shows that some glory in their evil deeds. Some, moreover, are prompt and strong for evil, and weak for good. He says, therefore: you, sinner, "who are mighty in iniquity": Jer. 3: "You have done evil and have prevailed": Is. 5: "Woe to you who are mighty at drinking wine," etc. You, therefore, who are thus mighty, "why" -- that is, for what reason -- "do you glory in malice?" You ought rather to be ashamed and confounded and sorrowful: Prov. 2: "They rejoice when they have done evil, and exult in the worst things." "All day long your tongue devises injustice," etc. Here he shows the second point which he set forth above: namely, that they not only glory in their malice, but think about how they may do evil. And first he sets forth the assiduity of their thinking without interruption; hence he says, "All day long your tongue has devised injustice." It is said improperly that the tongue thinks, because thinking pertains to the heart; and therefore it can be understood in two ways: "your tongue," that is, your heart, which is manifested in the tongue: Sir. 21: "In the mouth of fools is their heart," because it is one with the tongue, that is, the heart is ready for speech. Or "the tongue has devised injustice" insofar as it speaks what has been devised, all day long. And especially because he teaches through the tongue how to sin. Second, he carries out effectively what he devises; hence he says, "Like a sharp razor you have wrought deceit." And here is a comparison as to three things. First, because a sharp razor, that is, a barber's blade, cuts effectively and quickly, because no hair resists it; so Doeg did not reverence the priesthood nor the fear of David, nor anything; but he killed all the priests. Mic. 2: "In the morning light they do it," that is, immediately. Or "like a sharp razor," etc.: because just as a razor shaves hairs, so the wicked sharpen deceit against the just, that is, they send persecutors; but they truly do this like a razor, which shaves superfluous hairs: because only superfluous things, that is, temporal things, can sinners take from the saints, but never spiritual things. But "like a razor," etc., because it promises only cleansing, but just as inexperienced barbers cut the flesh, so the wicked do, who by their machinations strive to cut the flesh of the just, that is, their reputation, with an unjust tongue: Ps. 27: "They speak peace with their neighbor," etc. Jerome has: "Why do you glory in malice? The mercy of God endures all day long." And this is the sense: as if to say, you who are mighty in evil, why do you glory in malice? Mercy is prepared, to which you can turn.

[87292] "You have loved." Here he treats of the affection of the wicked, or of the sinner, for harming his neighbor. And this affection consists in two things: namely, in external and internal matters. First, therefore, in external matters he shows the withdrawal of justice. He says, therefore, "You have loved malice more than benignity." Benignity, that is, "good fire-quality": and so it makes the soul of a man melt toward sharing good things; malice, on the contrary, drives a man's impulse to harm. And those wicked sinners have loved malice more than goodness, that is, benignity, because they are more prompt to evil than to good, since they are cold and lax: Job 20: "When evil is sweet in his mouth, he hides it under his tongue." As to the withdrawal of justice, he says, "You have loved speaking iniquity more than speaking equity": Ps. 10: "He who loves iniquity hates his own soul." As to internal matters, he says, "You have loved all words of ruin," drawing others into death, as Doeg did; and again into the evil of guilt: 1 Cor. 15: "Evil conversations corrupt good morals." Or, precipitating yourself; and therefore he says, "with a deceitful tongue." And you who are talkative and deceitful, or you do this through a deceitful tongue: Jer. 9: "A wounding arrow is their tongue; it has spoken deceit."

[87293] "Therefore." Above, the Psalmist treated of the malice of sinners; here, however, he treats of their punishment: and concerning this he does two things. First he sets forth the punishment of those wicked ones. Second he shows the usefulness of their punishment, at "The just shall see." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the punishment of the wicked. Second he sets forth the manner of arriving at that punishment, at "He will pluck you out." He says, therefore, "Therefore," namely because "you have loved malice," etc., "and you have loved words of ruin to cast others down," "God will destroy you unto the end," that is, in perpetuity: Ps. 27: "You will destroy them, and you will not build them up." And rightly: "Cast them down, O Lord, and divide their tongues" (Ps. 54). As to the manner: "He will pluck you out." Where it should be noted that first this destruction is set forth as to the manner itself. Second, as to the loss of future goods. As to the first, two things are to be considered. For sometimes it happens that men have certain foundations for their prosperity, such as friends, riches, and the like: and therefore they are compared to a root, because through these they are rooted in these things; and therefore he says, "He will pluck you out" from all those things in which and through which you are rooted in prosperity: Job 19: "He has taken away my hope like a tree torn up": Jer. 1: "That you may pluck up and destroy," etc. Second, he migrates after the first loss, that is, he is totally transferred; hence, "He will remove you," that is, he will make you pass, "from your tent," that is, from your house and from your state and from your dignity: Is. 22: "I will drive you from your station": Job 20: "The eye that had seen him shall see him no more." Another reading has, "from his tent," that is, the Church: Rev. 21: "Behold, the tabernacle of God with men." Now the good are mixed with the wicked; but in the end the wicked shall be excluded from the Church, where now they are in number, not in merit. As to the loss of future goods, he says, "And your root from the land of the living," namely, "he will pluck out." By "root" is understood here charity, which is the root of all goods: Eph. 3: "Rooted in charity," etc. God takes this away from the land of the living, because he takes from you the gift of charity which he gave. Likewise, from the good, covetousness will be taken away, which can be signified by "root": 1 Tim. 6: "The root of all evils is covetousness." God takes this from spiritual men, because those who are intent on temporal things cannot arrive at the land of the living: because "those who wish to become rich fall into temptation" (ibid.), in which covetous desires the wicked are rooted, namely the Antichrist and the Devil: Job 5: "I have seen the fool," that is, the sinner, "with a firm root, and I immediately cursed his beauty."

[87294] "The just shall see." Here is set forth the fruit of punishment: for God punishes here and foretells punishments for the benefit of the just. First, on account of the fear of punishment, because "they shall fear." And this can be applied to the state of the present life, in which the just fear by having reverence for God, and they fall from the state in which they are: Rom. 11: "Do not think highly of yourself, but fear." But those who are in the fatherland do not fear falling from any state, because they are confirmed in the perfection of grace, because they will not be separated, but they will fear with filial reverence: Ps. 18: "The fear of the Lord is holy," etc. And they will reverence the justice of God. Nevertheless, more specifically in the present life they fear. Second, on account of the contempt of sin and present prosperity. And first derision is set forth. Second, the cause of derision is set forth, at "Behold." As to the first, "over him," that is, against him, namely the sinner, "they shall laugh," that is, they shall despise his confidence and prosperity. And this will especially happen in the future: Ps. 57: "The just man shall rejoice when he shall see the vengeance": Job 22: "The just shall see and shall rejoice"; and they deride, first, the pride of the sinners; second, their vain confidence and their fragile glory. Their pride, because they did not hope in God but trusted in themselves, and they shall say: the just shall say, "Behold the man who did not set God as his helper," that is, did not consider that he needed the help of God: Ps. 11: "Our lips," etc. Deut. 32: "He has forsaken his maker." Concerning vain confidence; hence he says, "But he hoped in the multitude of his riches": Prov. 11: "He who trusts in his riches shall fall": 1 Tim. 6: "Charge the rich of this world," etc. Concerning vain glory, to do evil and with God's permission to prevail; hence he says, "And he prevailed in his vanity." And they are derided for this: Ps. 93: "The Lord knows the thoughts of men, that they are vain." Or "he prevailed," etc., so that it refers to the miser, who in some respect prevails over all other sinners: Sir. 10: "Nothing is more wicked than the miser." And from this, once led to this point, he easily falls into other sins. Or it can refer to the Antichrist, because he prevails over all others.

[87295] "But I am like a fruitful olive tree." Here he treats of the holiness of the good. And first he shows what they do in the present. Second, what they promise, at "I will praise you." The saints do a twofold good in the present Church. First, in that they relate well to their neighbor by bearing fruit in them: and therefore the just man is compared to an olive tree; as if to say, the sinner is thus plucked out without fruit, but "I am like a fruitful olive tree in the house of God." And he is compared to an olive tree on account of its richness: for the olive always has rich fruit: Judg. 9: "I cannot forsake my richness"; Jer. 11: "The Lord called your name a thick, beautiful, fruitful, goodly olive tree." Here, however, he is compared to an olive tree especially on account of its fruit: because from olives oil is made, by which mercy is signified, from which the just provide for others and bear fruit in the Church: Jn. 15: "I have appointed you that you should go and bear fruit." And this fruit I have borne "in the house of God," not in the world: Ps. 83: "I have chosen to be an abject in the house of God." Likewise, as regards God, the just do another good in this world, namely by hoping in him; hence he says, "I have hoped in the mercy of God," not by my own merits, but by his mercy: Tit. 3: "Not by works of justice which we have done," etc. And this mercy is "forever and ever." And this can be expounded in two ways. In one way, to designate eternity: and so the eternity can be referred to the essence of divine mercy, which is eternal: Jer. 31: "I have loved you with an everlasting love; therefore I have drawn you, taking pity." In another way, so that it refers to the effect of mercy. Sometimes eternal goods are granted from God's mercy; and so "forever and ever," that is, through all ages. "I will praise you." Here he promises what he will do: and he promises two things. One refers to the past: and it is thanksgiving for benefits conferred; for this reason he says, "I will praise you forever," that is, I will render praises to you. And this because "you have done it," namely that I should be a fruitful olive tree in the house of the Lord, and that I should hope in the mercy of God. The other refers to the future: "I will wait upon your name, because it is good." He waits for the name of Jesus to be his salvation. And this especially happens in those who are in the fatherland; hence he says, "Because it is good in the sight of your saints," who see the very essence of goodness, and therefore cannot but love God.
