Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 7
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 7

[86827] Above, Psalms were set forth for deliverance from enemies; here a Psalm is presented in which he seeks vengeance against them. And the following title is prefixed: "Unto the end, which he sang to the Lord for the words of Cushi, the son of the Benjaminite." The history is found in 2 Sam. 17: that David fled from the face of his son, and Ahithophel, the wisest, adhered to Absalom. But Hushai adhered to David, whom David sent back so that he might learn the counsels of Ahithophel and report them to him. When Ahithophel had given Absalom counsel very harmful to his father David -- namely, that he should immediately attack him before he could find refuge somewhere -- Hushai secretly informed David, so that he might flee from the open country where he was and cross the Jordan to the most fortified places. Having heard, therefore, this report of Hushai, David sang this canticle to the Lord; and therefore it says here, "which he sang to the Lord for the words of Cushi, the son of the Benjaminite." He is called "son of the Benjaminite" because perhaps he was from the tribe of Benjamin, or because he descended from someone who had this name. Jerome does not have "unto the end," nor "for victory," but "for ignorance" or "for the ignorant." And he says "concerning the words of the Ethiopian"; yet it is not known whether he was an Ethiopian. Mystically, moreover, this Psalm can belong to the Church and be directed against persecutors. And it is said "for the words of Cushi," which is interpreted as "silence," while "Benjaminite" means "son of the right hand"; as if to say: by the hidden judgment of divine providence it happened that Ahithophel, who is interpreted as "a brother's ruin" -- namely Judas Iscariot -- conspired by counsel and assistance for the ruin, that is, the death, of his brother, namely Christ, who "is not ashamed to call them brothers" (Heb. 2). But what Judas did for the destruction of one man, Christ turned to the salvation of all, as Augustine says in the Gloss. This Psalm has three parts. First, the prayer is set forth. Second, the hearing, at "The Lord judges." Third, the thanksgiving, "I will confess to the Lord." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he prays to be delivered from enemies. Second, that the enemies be brought low: "Arise, O Lord, in your anger." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he asks for mercy. Second, he alleges his innocence: "O Lord my God, if I have done this." Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he sets forth the disposition of the one praying. Second, he presents the petition: "Save me." Third, the reason for the petition: "Lest he seize." The disposition of prayer is that one should hope in the Lord: Sir. 2: "For no one has hoped in the Lord and been confounded." And therefore he says, "In you I have hoped." The petition is twofold: for he asks to be saved and to be delivered, according to Dionysius. To be delivered is to be removed from evil; to be saved is to be preserved in good things. Thus he asks to be saved from the corruption of enemies and to be delivered from them. And this can be understood of bodily enemies and of spiritual ones; as if to say: save me from enemies and from temptations. Ps. 21: "Save me from the lion's mouth." Likewise: "Deliver my soul from their malice." He sets forth the reason for the petition when he says, "Lest he seize," etc.; as if to say: unless you come to my aid, Absalom will devour me like a lion. 2 Sam. 15: "Arise, let us flee, for there will be no escape for us from the face of Absalom." And above he says in the plural, "from all who persecute me"; here in the singular: "Lest he seize like a lion," because all are comprehended under one head -- the spiritual under the one Devil, the bodily under Absalom. Of the first, 1 Pet. 5: "Your adversary the Devil, like a roaring lion," etc. Ps. 9: "He lies in ambush in secret like a lion," etc. "Seize" as if suddenly and swiftly: Jn. 10: "The wolf seizes," because the Devil acts treacherously. And he will do this "while there is no one to redeem," etc. One is redeemed when delivered from evil, and this refers to liberation from punishment: Hos. 13: "I will redeem them from death." "Nor one who saves," through liberation from guilt: Mt. 1: "He will save his people from their sins." Jerome has: "Lest he seize my soul like a lion and rend it, and there be no one to deliver." Then he alleges his innocence: "O Lord my God, if I have done this." And this can be understood in two ways: either by way of an oath or of a prediction. If by way of an oath, then it should be known that there is a twofold oath: namely by attestation, as in Rom. 1: "God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit," etc.; and by imprecation, as when one says, "If I have done this, may this befall me." Job 31: "If I rejoiced at the ruin of him who hated me," etc. 2 Cor. 1: "I call God as witness upon my soul"; as if to say: if I am not innocent, let him seize me. Or it can be understood by way of a prediction; as if to say: if I am guilty of these faults, this will be my punishment -- "let me fall," etc. And according to this, he first excludes guilt from himself: "If I have done this," etc. Second, he determines his punishment: "Let me fall," etc. He excludes guilt from himself, first in general, when he says, "O Lord my God, if I have done this." What is "this"? Sin, namely that of pride, according to the Gloss, which is, as it were, the universal sin: Sir. 10: "The beginning of all sin is pride." Or otherwise: "this" -- because when someone suffers some tribulation through his own fault, it is said to him, "You brought this on yourself"; as if to say, you are the cause that this is happening. And thus he says: "If I have done this," that is, if I gave cause for this persecution. 2 Sam. 8: "David administered justice and equity to all his people." Mic. 7: "I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned against him," etc. Second, when he says, "If there is iniquity," etc., he excludes guilt in particular. Here he does three things: for first he says that he did injustice to no one; and therefore he says, "If there is iniquity": Job 11: "If there is iniquity in my hand," etc. 1 Sam. 24: "Consider and see that there is no evil or iniquity in my hand." Hence, when a man does injustice to no one, it seems unjust that he should be afflicted. Second, indeed, he forgave offenses; and therefore he says, "If I have repaid," etc. And this in 1 Sam. 24: "My eye spared you. For I said: I will not extend my hand against my lord, because he is the Lord's anointed." Lev. 19: "Do not seek revenge, nor be mindful of the injuries of your citizens." Third, that he did good to his enemies, which is the third good. Hence Jerome's text has, "I let my enemies go away empty-handed." Rom. 12: "Do not be overcome by evil, but overcome," etc. Prov. 25: "If your enemy is hungry," etc. Mt. 5: "Do good to those who hate you." 2 Kings 6: Elisha commanded the king of Samaria to set food before the army of the king of Syria, who had come to capture him. And a great provision of food was set before them.

[86828] Next, when he says, "Let me fall," he determines the punishment that follows, as if to say: if these things I say are not true, let these things happen to me. And first he sets forth the loss of goods. Second, of person. Third, of glory. He says, therefore, regarding the first: let this evil befall me, namely, that I fall deservedly, that is, justly, before my enemies -- that is, let my goods be taken from me. Job 31: "If a stain has clung to my members, let me sow and another eat." Regarding the person, he sets forth three things that a man suffers in himself. First, persecution. Second, captivity. Third, death. Regarding the first, he says, "let him pursue." Regarding the second, "let him seize." Regarding the third, "and let him trample" -- either by killing, or by utterly casting me down. Regarding glory, he adds, "and my glory," etc. As if to say: whatever it is in which I glory, let it be reduced to dust and scattered. Mystically: the enemy, the Devil, pursues by tempting. Lam. 4: "Our pursuers were swifter," etc. "Let him seize" -- through consent to sin. Lam. 1: "All her pursuers overtook her in her straits." "Let him trample" -- through habit and contempt. Is. 51: "Bow down that we may pass over." The glory of man is twofold: namely natural and spiritual. Of the first, 1 Cor. 11: "Man," that is, the mind, "ought not to cover his head, because he is the glory and image of God." Of the second, 2 Cor. 1: "Our glory is this: the testimony of our conscience." Therefore the Devil brings the glory of man down to the dust, because the image of God is disfigured, because it is stained. 1 Tim. 4: "Having their conscience seared." Ps. 72: "Lord, in your city, you will reduce their image to nothing."

[86829] Above he set forth a prayer for himself, asking to be delivered and saved; here he petitions against the enemies. Here he does two things. First, he asks for their punishment. Second, the fruit of their punishment, at "and be exalted." Let us first read the text according to history, as it could have applied to David. "Arise" is said to two kinds of people: to one who sleeps and to one who lies down. Now God, when he does not punish sins, seems to sleep, as though he did not have the vigilance of prudence: Ps. 43: "Arise! Why do you sleep, O Lord?" Likewise, when he does not punish, he seems to lie powerless; but then he seems to rise when he manifests his power by punishing adversaries: Is. 26: "Let your hand be exalted, that they may not see; let them see and be confounded with zeal for the people, and let fire devour your inheritance." He says "in anger," that is, in punishment, which is the effect of anger. The fruit of punishment he sets forth as threefold. One is on God's part: that God be exalted -- not in himself, but in the estimation of men, because through this he is regarded as lofty and powerful. And therefore he says, "be exalted"; as if to say: bring down my enemies, and in this you will appear lofty. Sir. 36: "As in their sight you were magnified in us, so in our sight," etc. And he says, "in the borders," so as to utterly bring them down, and nothing remain, by invading their borders. Jerome has, "Rise up, raging against the enemies"; as if to say: be angry, and in this be exalted. Another fruit is on David's part: for in 1 Sam. 13, we read, "The Lord found a man after his own heart, whom he commanded to be a leader over his people." And David himself says of himself in 2 Sam. 6: "The Lord commanded me to be a leader," etc. This command seemed to be made void with David being brought low; and therefore he says, "Arise in the command which you commanded," namely, that I be a leader in the kingdom. And therefore Jerome has, "Rise up to the judgment you commanded for me." Another fruit is on the people's part. In the old law, arrangements were made through men for other leaders of the people; but regarding the supreme leader, this was dispensed only by God: Num. 27: "Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, provide a man," etc. Deut. 17: "When you enter the land which the Lord your God will give you, and you possess it and dwell in it, and you say, 'I will set a king over me, as all the surrounding nations have,' you shall set over yourself the one whom the Lord your God will choose." Therefore the people in the matter of the supreme ruler were to follow the divine ordinance; and therefore he adds, "and the congregation of peoples will surround you," that is, will follow your ordinance, to return to me. "And for this, return on high," that is, your magnificence will appear; as if to say: not only for the sake of vengeance, but so that people may return to me. But insofar as it refers to Christ, it is a petition for the mystery of the incarnation, in which there is a twofold fruit. The first is the depression of the demons and the conversion of men: "Arise, O Lord." Regarding the first, he says, "Arise," that is, appear in the world through the incarnation, "and this in your anger," that is, to punish the demons: Jn. 12: "Now is the judgment of this world," etc. Mk. 1: "What have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come before the time to destroy us?" "And be exalted in the borders of the enemies," taking away their possession: Lk. 11: "When a strong man, fully armed, guards his palace, his possessions are in peace. But when one stronger than he attacks and overcomes him, he takes from him all his armor in which he trusted and distributes his spoils." And Mt. 12: "How can anyone enter the strong man's house and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man? And then he will plunder his house." Or against the Jews, so that it is the petition of the Church of the Gentiles against them. And he says, "be exalted in the borders of the enemies"; the rest remains unchanged. What is exalted appears to man from this, but thereby becomes hidden -- as, for example, when something is exalted too high. Therefore, just as what lies hidden in the depths, if it is raised up, appears -- Job 28: "He has searched out the depths of the rivers and brought hidden things into the light" -- so he says, "be exalted," that is, be manifested. And just as what is exalted too much becomes hidden -- hence Acts 1: "He was lifted up, and a cloud received him out of their sight" -- so "be exalted," that you may become hidden from the Jews, so that they may not recognize you, and thus crucify you, and thereby be redeemed. Regarding the second, he says, "Arise, O Lord God, in the command" -- for the conversion of men. Here first the motive for conversion is set forth. Second, its perfection. Third, its punishment. He says, therefore, "in the command," namely of meekness and humility, "which you commanded": Mt. 11: "Learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart." Arise, therefore, in this command, that is, appear humble while being lofty; as if to say: so accept humility that you do not abandon your loftiness. Or arise from the dead, "and so the congregation of peoples will surround you," the assembly, namely, of the blessed who will be rewarded and the wicked who will be punished. Song 1: "Your name is oil poured out," etc. Is. 2: "The mountain of the house of the Lord will be prepared on the top of the mountains, and will be elevated above the hills, and all nations will flow to it." And chapter 6 (actually Is. 60): "Lift up your eyes round about: all these who are gathered together have come to you." "And for this, return on high," namely, to perfect this congregation, that is, the assembly of believers: Eph. 4: "Ascending on high, he led captivity captive," etc. Mic. 2: "He ascends, opening the way before them." Or "on high" -- you will be hidden from the eyes of the Jews, etc. "The congregation of peoples will surround you" -- by despising and persecuting, in which they will be most punished.

[86830] The second part of this Psalm is that in which the hearing of the petition is treated. And because the hearing of the petition takes place by the judgment of God, the divine judgment is introduced. And first he sets it forth. Second, he treats of its delay: "God is a just, strong, and patient judge; will he be angry every day?" Concerning the first, he does three things. First, the judgment is set forth. Second, its manner: "Judge me, O Lord," etc. Third, the fitness of the judge: "God, who searches hearts and minds." He says, therefore: I have enemies who persecute me, and I seek to be delivered by divine help. And concerning this I am confident, because the Lord judges the peoples; "for he judges the world in equity and the peoples in his truth" (Ps. 96). Is. 3: "The Lord stands to judge, and he stands to judge the peoples." And note that after he said, "for this, return on high," he adds about the judgment, because after the ascension he will return to judge: Acts 1: "Just as you saw him ascending into heaven, so will he come to judge." The manner of the judgment is set forth in the form of a prayer, because by praying he shows what will happen in the judgment, saying, "Judge me." And first he sets forth the reward of the good. Second, the punishment of the wicked: "The wickedness of sinners will be consumed." In the judgment, two things are rendered: for good things are given to the good, and evil things to the wicked. Therefore, whoever is good and lacks evils will have an abundance of goods and the removal of evils: Prov. 1: "He who hears me will enjoy abundance, with the fear of evils taken away," etc. And therefore, regarding the first, he says, "Judge me according to my justice," namely, which you gave me, according as I am just; and this justice means that good things should be rendered to me: Mt. 5: "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for justice, because," etc. Regarding the second, he says, "according to my innocence"; and this justice means that he should suffer nothing evil: Job 22: "The innocent will be saved; he will be saved, moreover, by the cleanness of his hands." And note that he asks for this judgment according to justice. Above, in the penitential Psalm, he says "according to mercy," commemorating no merit; but now, because having been justified he had done certain good things to which a reward was owed, he asks to be judged according to justice. What he says, "upon me," indicates that the justice and innocence of man are not from man but from God. Against this petition -- that good things be his and that he suffer nothing evil -- it sometimes seems good and useful to be oppressed by the wicked, and even beyond this, the good have evils in this world and the wicked have goods: Lk. 16: "Remember that you received good things in your life," etc. And the reason for this is assigned: "The wickedness of sinners will be consumed," that is, will come to an end: Rev., last chapter: "He who is filthy, let him be filthy still." Note that sometimes God defers punishment so that the predestined may be converted: Is. 30: "Therefore the Lord waits for you, that he may have mercy on you." Hence, then, "the wickedness of sinners will be consumed," that is, will fail. Sometimes, so that the wicked may more fully manifest their malice and the judgments of God may appear just, then "the wickedness of sinners will be consumed," that is, will be perfected, so that the vengeance may appear more just. On account of this, Gen. 15 says: "Know and be forewarned that your seed will be a stranger," etc., "because the iniquities of the Amorites are not yet complete," etc. Acts 7: "And he did not give him an inheritance in it, not even a foot's breadth," etc., up to "the Lord said." Thus he says, "will be consumed"; as if to say: let them do whatever they can, because finally their wickedness will be consumed. But will the wicked oppress the good? No, because God will direct the just. Hence, "You will direct the just one." Prov. 2: "The simplicity of the just will direct them."

[86831] Then when he adds, "searching," he shows the fitness of the judge. And first he sets forth the fitness of the judge. Second, the confidence conceived from him, at "My just help." Two things are required for the fitness of a judge: namely, that he be wise and that he be just. These, however, are in God; and therefore he is a fit judge: Prov. 20: "The king who sits on the throne of judgment scatters all evil with his glance." For he is most wise, knowing all things, even interior ones: Heb. 4: "All things are naked and open to his eyes." He is also most just: Jer. 11: "But you, O Lord of Hosts, who judge justly," etc. And therefore he says, "searching hearts." Jerome has it thus: "The tester of heart and mind is God, who is just"; and after follows another verse: "My shield is in God." Where our text has, "My just help," etc. He says, therefore, "searching." There are three things in man: one that appears, namely the external work; and two that are hidden, namely intention and delight. These two are hidden from us but manifest to God. And because they are known to God, though hidden from us, therefore he says, "searching hearts," because he knows the intention, "and minds," that is, the delight -- namely, whether you delight in the praise of God or of men. But because "to search" is "to inquire," and to inquire belongs to one who is ignorant, he removes this from God. And to show that God evidently knows: when he said, "will be consumed," etc., he fittingly said, "searching," because in tribulation the condition of men is most manifest. Then he infers, "My just help is from the Lord," etc. Here the confidence conceived from the judge is set forth, from whom help is to be hoped for. For there is a twofold help of God: namely, of mercy, and another of justice. The help by which one is freed from evils and sins is of mercy, and it is not just, because it is not from merits. But when someone is justified, God brings it to completion; and this is of justice, because it corresponds in some way to merit. Of the first, Ps. 9: "A helper in times of need," etc. Of the second, Ps. 45: "God will help her," etc. But why? Because "he saves," etc. Prov. 2: "He will guard the salvation of the upright." "The upright of heart," that is, those who by intention tend toward God. But Cassiodorus asks: Why does he not say "who saves the upright in their minds" but "the upright of heart"? I answer: Uprightness pertains to the ordering toward the end, and for this there is intention; and therefore it is necessary that the intention be upright. In the mind, however, there is sensible delight.

[86832] Above he set forth the divine judgment; here, however, he treats of the delay of the future event, namely of punishment. And first he shows the cause of the delay. Second, the preparation for vengeance: "unless you are converted," etc. He proposes, moreover, three causes why God might be thought not to punish sinners. One is because he is not just, so as to remove the providence over human acts: Ezek. 9: "The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great, and the land is filled with blood, and the city is filled with perversion. For they say: 'The Lord has forsaken the earth, and the Lord does not see.'" Job 22: "He walks about the poles of heaven and does not consider our affairs." And he excludes this from God, who is a judge and is just: Is. 32: "Behold, a king shall reign in justice, and a prince shall govern in judgment." Another cause is because he is not powerful; but he excludes this, because God is strong. Job 9: "If it is a matter of strength, he is most mighty." What, then, is the cause? Because he is patient; and therefore he says, "Will he be angry," etc., that is, he will not punish every day, but sometimes he waits and overlooks: Wis. 11: "Overlooking the sins of men on account of repentance." Is. 30: "The Lord waits for you, that he may have mercy on you." And Is. 28: "He who threshes will not thresh forever." Jerome has, "threatening all day long," namely through Sacred Scripture.

[86833] Then when he says, "Unless," he shows that the Lord prepares himself to inflict punishment, even though he delays for a reason. And this preparation is set forth: first on God's part as the one punishing; second on man's part as the one punished or receiving, at "Behold, he is in labor." The preparation on God's part is described according to man's preparation against merit or sin: because "the impious man and his impiety are hateful to God" (Wis. 14). And just as a man prepares himself with a sword against enemies who are nearby, but with a bow against those who are distant, so divine vengeance against those who seem to cling to him and can see the cause of punishment is called a sword, as if against those nearby; but a bow against those far off. And therefore he does not immediately punish you, but prepares himself so that you may be converted. "And unless you are converted, he will brandish his sword," etc. -- that is, his vengeance. Job 19: "Flee from the face of the sword, for the sword is the avenger of iniquity," etc. Zech. 9: "His arrow shall go forth like lightning." He will brandish it to terrify and to strike those nearby more forcefully, because unless a man is converted through threats, he strikes forcefully. Valerius Maximus writes: "Divine wrath proceeds with slow step to its vengeance, but compensates for the slowness of punishment with its severity." Jerome has, "He will sharpen his sword," that is, he will prepare a greater damnation. Deut. 32: "If I sharpen my sword like lightning," etc. Mt. 10: "I did not come to bring peace on earth, but a sword," etc. According to the Gloss, the sword of God is Christ. The brandishing, therefore, is the threat of Gehenna, in which the impious will be struck, as by his avenging: Is. 27: "On that day the Lord will visit with his hard and mighty sword," etc. He also prepares his bow, as if against those far off; hence, "his bow," etc. And first he treats of the preparation of the bow. Second, of the arrows. "And in it he prepared." He who prepares a bow first stretches it. Second, he positions it in his hand. Regarding the first, he says, "his bow," that is, divine vengeance, as if punishing unexpectedly. Regarding the second, he says, "and he prepared it": Is. 30: "For Topheth has been prepared from yesterday; prepared by the king, deep and wide" -- namely for punishing. Second, he treats of the preparation of the arrows: "and in it," etc. First regarding the arrows themselves. Second, how one places something more harmful in them, such as fire or poison. He says, therefore: "And in it," namely the bow, "he prepared instruments of death," that is, instruments of killing: Ezek. 9: "Each one has an instrument of destruction in his hand." "He made them burning," because there is something combustible in them, by which is understood the punishment of eternal fire. But it is said that in the Hebrew it reads, "He made his arrows for those who pursue me." By this bow, according to Augustine in the Gloss, Sacred Scripture is understood: Job 29: "My bow will be renewed in my hand." This is stretched when the harshness of the Old Testament is softened by the New. It is prepared when it is expounded. "And in it he prepared instruments of death." "Instruments of death" can be taken in two ways: namely in a good sense or in a bad sense. In a bad sense, these are the heretics, who prepare death for the simple from Sacred Scripture; and thus "he prepared," that is, he permitted to be prepared: Ps. 106: "He made them wander," etc. "He made" -- that is, he made outwardly, that is, he put them in appearance -- "arrows," penetrating sentences: Ps. 119: "Sharp arrows of the mighty," etc. Or in a good sense, "instruments of death" are the apostles, instruments of death to the disobedient: 2 Cor. 2: "To some we are the odor of death unto death." And he made them fit for burning with the fire of charity: Sir. 48: "Elijah arose like fire, and his word," etc.

[86834] Then when he says, "Behold," he treats of the preparation on the part of the man to be punished. Here he proposes two things: the progress into sin, by which one is prepared for punishment; and second, the incurring of the punishment: "a pit," etc. In the progress of sin, three things occur: the evil purpose, the endeavor, and the effect. And thus the enemies of David first conceived their plan, but at that time were in the stage of endeavor, and afterward carried it out. The purpose, moreover, is like a conception; the endeavor like labor pains; the effect like birth. And therefore he says, "Behold, he is in labor," that is, he strives to bring about injustice against his neighbor. "He conceived sorrow," because Jer. 9: "They labored to act unjustly." Is. 59: "They conceived iniquity." Jas. 1: "Desire, when it has conceived, brings forth sin." And he brought forth the iniquity conceived, because Absalom and Ahithophel with their accomplices had seized Jerusalem.

[86835] "A pit." He treats of the punishment. And first he sets forth the metaphor. Second, he explains it, at "It will be turned back." Hunters set traps to capture wolves in pits. The enemies themselves likewise, to capture men, employ their devices; and this is done through treachery, and therefore it is like a pit. Among the Hebrews, a pit is called "lacus" (cistern): Zech. 9: "As for you also, by the blood of your covenant, you sent forth your prisoners from the pit in which there was no water." "A pit," therefore, that is, a deep trench, "he opened," that is, he devised a fraud; "he dug," by thinking deeply; and by carrying it out, "he fell in," etc., because he planned to kill and was himself killed: Ps. 56: "They dug a pit before my face," etc. And he explains this: how before my face? Because "it will be turned back," etc. Because they conceived sorrow, the sorrow will be turned back upon his own head; namely, the iniquity that he brought forth will descend upon his own crown. Is. 24: "His iniquity will weigh him down," etc.

[86836] "I will confess." This is the third part, where he sets forth the thanksgiving according to God's justice, because merit preceded: Ps. 110: "Confession and magnificence are his work." "And I will sing with the Psaltery": Ps. 80: "Take up the Psalm and give the timbrel," etc.