Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 53
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 53

[87304] "O God, in your name." Above, in other Psalms, the Psalmist magnified the iniquity of sinners with regard to the inclination toward sin and the contempt of God; here he sets forth the persecution that he suffers from them. The title: "unto the end, understanding, of David, in verses." The first part of the title is plain. The second touches on the history written in 1 Sam. 23, when David came to the wilderness of the city of Ziph, and the men of that city denounced David to Saul, and Saul pursued him, but was unable to capture him. Hence this denunciation did not harm David, in which is signified that the Ziphites, that is, those who flourish in this world -- Is.: "The glory of the world is as the flower of the field" -- accuse the saints, yet cannot harm them, because the saint is hidden among the Ziphites, since the saint does not flourish among sinners, but his flourishing is hidden, namely, the flowers of virtue. Col. 3: "Your life is hidden with Christ." David therefore treats in this Psalm of the good who are hidden among the wicked and suffer persecution from them. This Psalm is therefore divided into three parts. First he sets forth a prayer. Second, he shows the necessity of praying, at "because strangers." Third, he sets forth the recompense, at "I will sacrifice willingly." Concerning the first he does two things. First he sets forth the petition. Second, the hearing of the prayer, at "O God, hear." His petition concerns two things. First he asks on his own behalf. Second, on behalf of his enemies. On his own behalf he asks to be saved, not through his own merits but on account of the love of the divine name. Hence he says: "O God, in your name save me." Acts 4: "There is no other name given under heaven," etc. Prov. 18: "The name of the Lord is a strong tower." On behalf of his adversaries he asks for judgment, which can be understood in three ways. In one way, of the judgment of discernment, so that his cause may be examined by them. Ps.: "Judge me, O God, and distinguish." In another way, of the judgment of vindication, so that God may judge him according to His justice, delivering him from evils. Is. 11: "He shall judge the poor in justice." In yet another way, of the judgment of condemnation. And this he does not ask out of a desire for vengeance, but in conformity with divine justice. Or he says this foreseeing the judgment of the wicked. And this is what he says: "and in your power judge me. O God, hear my prayer." Here the hearing is set forth. In prayer there are two things: namely, what is asked for, and the asking itself. Sometimes God grants what is asked for but does not hear the asking itself, because what is asked for someone obtains by grace and mercy, and these are given by God. But the asking itself is sometimes done by a sinner, and therefore it is not heard, because it is not acceptable to God. And so he asks that his prayer, his asking, may be fulfilled, when he says: "O God, hear my prayer," and that He may perceive his words with His ears: "with your ears perceive the words of my mouth." This happens when God accepts and approves his words. Ps.: "Give ear to my words," etc.

[87305] "Because strangers have risen up." Here he sets forth the necessity of praying, where he magnifies the persecution of his enemies: first from their disposition, second from their power, third from their contempt of God. From their disposition, because when someone who is utterly alien to another persecutes him, this is dangerous, because he attacks without mercy. And so he says, "because strangers," that is, demons or sinners -- if it is referred to any just person -- "have risen up against me" without any compassion or mercy. But they can be called strangers because they behave differently from friends, as Saul was estranged from David, and the Ziphites who denounced him to Saul. Job 19: "My acquaintances have departed from me as strangers." From their power, because when a weak person attacks, one can defend himself; but these are strong: "because the mighty have sought my soul." 1 Sam. 24: "Saul chose three thousand men to pursue David." Or "the mighty," that is, demons. Lk. 11: "When the strong man armed," that is, the Devil, etc. From their contempt of God, because sometimes someone desists from persecution insofar as he is restrained by the love of God. But these do not cease even on account of that; hence he says, "and they have not set God before their eyes." Ps.: "For he has said in his heart: God will not require it."

[87306] "For behold, God helps me." Here he shows that he has been heard in his prayer. And first he shows that he has been heard with regard to one thing. Second, he sets forth what he has been heard with regard to other things, at "turn back evils." It was said above that the prayer was for himself, when he says "save me," and for his enemies, when he says "in your power." First, therefore, he says that he has been heard on his own behalf, because he says he has been saved. And then he spoke of the enemies who had risen up against him and who were seeking his soul; and in both respects he has been saved. Because against the assault of enemies he says, "for behold, God helps me," that is, He provides me with help. Is. 50: "The Lord God is my helper." Against the fact that they seek his soul, he says, "the Lord is the protector of my soul" -- as if to say: the Lord has saved me by taking me into His protection. Wis. 3: "The souls of the just are in the hand of God." Ps.: "But you, O Lord, are my protector," etc.

[87307] "Turn back evils upon my enemies." Here he asks to be heard on behalf of his enemies. And he asks two things against the two things they were doing to him, because they were persecuting him and seeking to kill him. And so he asks that they themselves may suffer persecution and be destroyed. With regard to the first he says, "turn back," namely from me, upon my enemies, the evils which they seek to inflict on me. As if to say: turn upon them those evils which they wish to inflict on me. With regard to the second he says, "destroy them," that is, cause them to be destroyed, that is, to be slain; "and this in your power." Or "in your power," that is, on account of your might. But this seems to be against the word of Christ, who says: "pray for those who persecute you." It must be said that all these imprecations that are read in the prophets can be understood in three ways. In one way, as a manner of pronouncement, because they were speaking by the Spirit of God and foretelling things to come. As a manner of prayer: as if to say, "turn back," etc., that is, "you will turn back." Hence in the Hebrew the present tense is used: "you turn back." In another way, in conformity with divine justice. Third, as a spiritual denunciation. For sinners, when they cease to sin, then die and cease to be sinners. And this is to be continually prayed for.

[87308] "I will sacrifice willingly to you." Here he sets forth the recompense. And first the recompense is set forth. Second, the reason for the recompense. He intends to offer as recompense two things: sacrifice and confession. With regard to the first he says, "I will sacrifice willingly to you." Against this, above he said: "if you had desired sacrifice, I would have given it." And it must be said that here he speaks of the sacrifice that is acceptable to God, which is the sacrifice of a contrite spirit and the chastisement of the body. 1 Cor. 9: "I chastise my body," etc. Rom. 12: "Present your bodies as a living sacrifice," etc. The third sacrifice is from one's best possessions. Heb. 13: "Do not forget to do good and to share, for by such sacrifices God is won over," that is, God is pleased. With this threefold sacrifice, therefore, "I will sacrifice to you willingly," that is, with joy. 1 Ezra 3: "In all things wherein a sacrifice was voluntarily offered." 2 Cor. 9: "God loves a cheerful giver." With regard to the second he says, "I will give praise to your name, O Lord, because" -- namely, through thanksgiving. Tob. 12: "Bless the God of heaven," that is, give thanks. And why? Not on account of temporal goods, as sinners do, of whom it is said: "he will give you thanks when you do well for him." But on account of the goodness and kindness of God, and on account of benefits received, because he has been heard in his petitions. Hence he says he was heard with regard to himself, when he says, "because you have delivered me from every tribulation." And with regard to his enemies: "because my eye has looked down upon my enemies," because they were unable to harm him. Or "has looked down," etc., because he despised their felicity and prosperity: "the malicious one is brought to nothing," etc.
