Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 28
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 28

[87038] In other Psalms, the Psalmist recalled the confidence he has in God; here, however, as one who has been delivered, he gives thanks. And first are set forth Psalms pertaining to thanksgiving. Second, he recalls the benefits bestowed, at "In you, O Lord, I have hoped." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he invites others to give thanks. Second, he himself gives thanks, at "I will exalt you." The title: "A Psalm of David, at the completion of the tabernacle." And note the history of 1 Kgs. 4, where the children of Israel in the time of Eli fought against the Philistines, and the ark of God was captured, and it was in that land for six months. Finally, because of the plague, they sent it back to Gibeah. And when Saul had died, David took it and carried it to Jerusalem, and made a tabernacle for it, and danced before it, as is found in 2 Kgs. 6; and then this Psalm seems to have been composed. Mystically, the tabernacle designates the holy Church: Rev. 21: "Behold, the tabernacle of God with men." This tabernacle, namely the Church, has been snatched from the hands of the Philistines, that is, the demons; and what is said in this Psalm pertains to the gifts of the Holy Spirit, through which this tabernacle is brought to completion. It is therefore divided into two parts. In the first, he invites others to offer to God through thanksgiving. In the second, he recalls the benefits, at "The voice of the Lord is upon the waters." Concerning the first, he does three things. First, he shows to whom offering should be made. Second, who should offer. Third, what they ought to offer. He says therefore, "Bring." But to whom? "To the Lord," alone, and to no other: Ex. 22. That offering should be made to God alone is stated in 1 Chr. 29: "All things are yours, and what we have received from your hand, we have given to you." He shows who ought to offer: "sons of God." Sir. 34: "The Most High does not approve the gifts of the wicked." Gen. 4: "God first looked upon Abel, and then upon his gifts," because a person must first please God and then make an offering to him. And therefore he says, "sons of God," through faith: Jn. 1: "But to as many as received him, he gave the power to become sons of God, to those who believe in his name." Likewise, through charity: 1 Jn. 3: "See what manner of love God has given us," etc. Through good works: Rom. 8: "Those who are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God."

[87039] "Bring." Here he shows what should be offered. And first he sets forth the bodily sacrifice. Second, the spiritual one, at "Bring to the Lord glory." Offerings were made from three kinds of animals: namely, from oxen, goats, and rams; and above all other animals, the lamb was the most customary sacrifice. Hence in Ex. 29, it is said that every morning and evening one lamb was sacrificed, because through the lamb Christ was most expressly prefigured: Jn. 1: "Behold the Lamb of God." And therefore he says, "Bring to the Lord the offspring of rams," that is, lambs. Mystically, the rams are the leaders of the flock, that is, the apostles: Ps. 46: "The princes of the peoples have gathered together." Their offspring are the faithful: 1 Cor. 4: "In Christ Jesus, through the Gospel, I have begotten you." Bring, therefore, yourselves to God, you who are the offspring of rams.

[87040] "Bring." Next he sets forth the spiritual sacrifice. And first he states it. Second, he clarifies it, at "Bring to the Lord glory to his name." It should be noted that the Lord wished these things to be offered to him not for his own sake, because he himself said, "Shall I eat the flesh of bulls?" etc., but so that we might recognize him as the source of all our goods and the end to which all things are to be referred. And therefore it is lawful for no one to offer sacrifice except to God. For God is the end, and we can add nothing to him; and therefore we ought to glorify him, so that whatever we do, we do for his glory: 1 Cor. 10: "Do all things for the glory of God." Likewise, God is the source, and therefore we owe him honor. Mal. 1: "If I am the Lord, where is my honor?" And therefore he says, "Bring to the Lord glory and honor." 1 Tim. 1: "To God alone be honor and glory." "Adore the Lord." Here he clarifies the spiritual sacrifice. And first he shows how we owe him glory. Second, how we owe him honor. He says therefore that God himself is glorious, and therefore we owe him glory; hence he says, "Bring to the Lord glory to his name." He is glorious in himself; but his name ought to be glorious in us, that is, so that in our knowledge it may be glorious. And that he may be glorious and illustrious in us, we ought to give him honor. And therefore he says, "Adore the Lord in his holy court," that is, in this Church, which is like the court of heaven. Or "in the court," that is, in the mind: Jn. 4: "True worshipers," etc.

[87041] "The voice of the Lord is upon the waters," etc. Here he sets forth the divine benefits. And first, the past ones. Second, the future ones, at "The Lord makes the flood to dwell," etc. Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he enumerates the benefits bestowed. Second, he concludes with thanksgiving, at "And in his temple." The benefits bestowed can be explained figuratively and mystically. Figuratively, indeed; and so in the first part he sets forth two benefits bestowed: namely, at the departure, and second, after the departure from it, at "The voice of the Lord breaking." And first he recalls the benefit of the departure from Egypt. Second, he makes it manifest. He says therefore: "The voice," that is, the command, "of the Lord was upon the waters" of the divided sea, as is said in Ex. 14. And he magnifies this in three ways. First, on the part of authority: "The God of majesty," who is majesty itself: Is. 6: "The whole earth was full of his majesty," "thundered," because when Moses raised his hands, a wind blew. And this blowing he calls "thundered," because thunder is produced from the agitation of winds. Also on the part of the matter, because he dried up not small waters but many, namely those of the sea: Is. 41: "Did you not dry up the sea?" Wis. 10: "He brought them across through exceedingly great water." Also on the part of the effect, from the fact that it was of great power in that it cast down the enemies: Ex. 15: "Your right hand, O Lord, has struck the enemy." For this reason it is said, "The voice of the Lord in power." Also another effect is of magnificence; hence he says, "The voice of the Lord in magnificence," because he made them pass through the sea on dry ground. Hence it follows in the same place, namely Ex. 15: "Magnificent in holiness, terrible and praiseworthy," etc. "The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars, and the Lord will break," etc.

[87042] Next he recalls the benefits bestowed after the crossing. And this can be understood in two ways. First, through the removal of evil. Second, through the conferring of goods, at "The voice of the Lord shaking." Concerning the first, he does two things. First, he sets forth the benefit. Second, the ease of conferring the benefit, at "And he will reduce to pieces." He says therefore: "The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars." Cedars are great men; and this signifies the Amorites, who were tall and strong: Amos 2: "I destroyed the Amorite before their face, whose height was the height of cedars, and he was as strong as an oak." Likewise, in the entire land that had been promised to them, there were Amorites and other nations who could not be exterminated and subjugated until the time of David. All the Amorites still dwelt around Lebanon, as is said in Josh. 15. And therefore he says, "The Lord will break the cedars of Lebanon," that is, the Amorites who still dwelt there, "and he will reduce them to pieces like a calf of Lebanon, and Sharon like the offspring of unicorns." The Hebrews have it thus: "And he will reduce them like a calf of Lebanon and Sharon like the offspring of wild oxen." And the literal sense is this: because there is a difference between wild oxen and domestic cattle, since wild oxen are nourished in marshlands, while cattle are on the mountains. For on Mount Lebanon there were many pastures where great cedars grew. Likewise there were calves and cattle there. He says therefore: it will be as easy for God to crush the cedars of Lebanon as if he were crushing a calf of Sharon. Sharon is a certain place: Is. 35: "The beauty of Carmel and Sharon." This place is watery, where wild oxen graze. As if to say: even Sharon he will crush like the offspring of a wild ox, or a calf. Mystically, "The voice of the Lord upon the waters." A twofold benefit is implied: namely, of conversion and of the gifts that are given to the converted. "The voice of the Lord in power." According to the mystery, this can be explained in two ways. In one way, so that it is referred to the preaching of Christ; and so it deals with the conversion of Jews and Gentiles. Of the Jews, when he says "upon the waters." Human beings are likened to waters, because just as waters, people flow and do not return, 2 Kgs. 14. Hence "upon the waters" is said "the voice," that is, the preaching of the Lord, that is, upon the Jewish people, because from the teaching of God -- not yet incarnate, but awaited -- the Jews were converted to God. Concerning the conversion of the Gentiles, it follows when he says, "The God of majesty thundered." Thunder is formed in a cloud, in which the incarnation itself is signified, which is like a cloud: Is. 19: "Behold, the Lord ascends upon a light cloud." The God of majesty, therefore, thundered, that is, the almighty thundered through preaching from the cloud of his flesh: Job 37: "He will thunder with his voice marvelously." And he says "upon many waters," because the voice of the incarnate Lord was not only upon the Jews but upon the Gentiles: Is. 49: "I have given you as a light to the nations," etc. Or "upon the waters" of Baptism; hence from the time that Christ was baptized, this Psalm is sung. "The voice of the Lord in power." Above, the Psalmist, according to the mystical understanding, touched upon the mystery of the conversion of the Jews and Gentiles; here, however, he sets forth the benefit of temporal gifts. And concerning this he does three things. First, he proposes the spiritual gifts. Second, he sets forth the uprooting of vices that follows from them, at "The voice of the Lord breaking." Third, the advancement or promotion to good things, at "The voice of the Lord preparing." In spiritual gifts there is this difference: because to some, spiritual gifts are given for those things that are commonly fitting and must be done and are necessary for salvation; to others, for certain arduous things, such as working miracles and the like. As to the first, he says, "The voice of the Lord in power," that is, by the Lord's command, power is given to fulfill the precepts. As to the second, he says, "The voice of the Lord in magnificence," that is, by the Lord's command, power is given to his saints to do great things: Ps. 67: "Over Israel is his magnificence." The Gloss adapts these to the gifts of the Holy Spirit. And the first, namely the conversion of the faithful, to the gift of fear, which is accomplished by divine power, to which it pertains to allow fears. Magnificence pertains to the gift of knowledge, because to knowledge it pertains to do great things: Sir. 25: "How great is the one who finds wisdom." "The voice of the Lord breaking." Here he treats the exclusion of vices, and he touches first on the vice of pride. Second, of concupiscence, at "The voice of the Lord dividing the flame of fire." Third, the vice of unbelief or contempt, at "The voice of the Lord shaking the desert." He shows, therefore, first the exclusion of pride. Hence it should be noted that just as fir trees are tall, so are cedars; and therefore through them pride is signified. He says therefore, "The voice of the Lord breaking the cedars," that is, the power of the divine command over all the proud: Is. 14: "Your pride has been dragged down to Hell." "And he will break the cedars of Lebanon," that is, the voice of the Lord over the arrogant and proud, reducing them by his power; because all kings were converted to Christ through this. And finally upon the cedars of Lebanon, because the greater ones among the Jews were converted, as about Nicodemus, Jn. 3.

[87043] Likewise, "And he will reduce them like a calf." Here the perfection of conversion is set forth. Mount Lebanon is very rich in pastures, and the priests, on account of the abundance of victims, had cattle graze there. And therefore, "He will reduce them like a calf of Lebanon," that is, he will humble them like a calf of Lebanon, so that they may offer themselves as a sacrifice, just as the calf nourished on Mount Lebanon is offered. And this is evident, because many great people exposed themselves to martyrdom for Christ: Mt. 22: "My bulls and fatted calves have been slaughtered." "And the beloved one, as the offspring of unicorns." This can be read in two ways. First, so that it signifies the authority of the crushing; as if to say: the Beloved One will do these things. And according to this, the Beloved One is placed in the singular, as having authority. "This is my Son," etc. Mt. 3. And he will do these things as the offspring of unicorns, that is, as the son of the Jews, because the mystery of the incarnation accomplished these things. And the Jews are called unicorns inasmuch as they glory in the worship of one God. Or he is called a unicorn because according to his eternal generation he is without a mother, and according to his temporal generation he was a son without a father. In another way, "The Beloved One," etc., that is, Christ, as an example of this crushing, will suffer, giving others an example of suffering: 1 Pet. 2: "Christ suffered for us, leaving you an example, that you might follow in his footsteps." And he will suffer not as God, but as the offspring of the unicorns, that is, of the Jews. Let us return, therefore, to the literal sense.

[87044] "The voice of the Lord dividing the flame." Here he recalls the benefit by which they were freed from an evil inflicted by God. In Num. 11, it is said that on account of the murmuring of the people, fire invaded part of the camp, and at the raising of Moses' hands the fire was extinguished. And this is what he says: "The voice," that is, the command, "of the Lord dividing," that is, destroying, "the flame of fire." Next he recalls the benefits that promote in good. And he sets forth three: first, the benefit of the multiplication of the people; second, the nourishment of the little ones; third, guidance through the desert. Jerome's text reads, "The voice of the Lord causing the desert to bring forth." It is read thus in Joshua: None of those who came out of Egypt and entered the desert entered the promised land, except Joshua and Caleb, as is clear from Num. 14. But all who entered it were born in the desert. And therefore he recalls this benefit, that the people were not extinguished. Hence he says, "The voice of the Lord causing to bring forth," that is, causing to give birth, "and especially the desert of Kadesh." Because as far as Moses' intention went, those leaving Egypt would immediately enter the promised land and come to Kadesh. Hence they sent scouts, and those scouts dissuaded them and they were afraid to enter. And on account of that sin, all died. And because from that point they gave up entering, all died in this desert. Or according to our text, "The voice of the Lord shaking the desert," that is, stirring to generation throughout the desert of Kadesh. "The voice of the Lord preparing the deer." Jerome has, "acting as midwife for the deer." The Hebrew has, "preparing the mules." Deer dwell in deserts. And because the children of Israel were in the desert for forty years, they are called deer: Ps. 17: "He made my feet like the feet of deer," because the women had the opportunity to give birth and to nurse. "And he will reveal the dense forests," or thickets, because he provided guidance through the pillar of fire by night and of cloud by day: Ps. 135: "He led his people through the desert." Mystically, in that he says "The voice of the Lord breaking," the gift of fortitude is signified. And here he sets forth the exclusion of the sin of concupiscence, when he says, "The voice of the Lord dividing the flame of fire," namely of concupiscence: Wis. 6: "The desire for wisdom will lead to the everlasting fire." And this nourishes other evils, concerning which 1 Jn. 2 says: "All that is in the world is either the concupiscence of the eyes," etc. And this consumes: Job 31: "It is a fire that devours to destruction." Basil explains it thus: "The voice of the Lord dividing," etc., because on the day of judgment, by divine power, fire will be divided, because burning without light will be in the fire enveloping the reprobate. Fire shining without burning will be for the glory of the elect. And what he says pertains to the gift of counsel. "The voice of the Lord shaking the desert." Here he sets forth the exclusion of a twofold unbelief: namely, of the Gentiles and of the Jews. As to the first, he says, "The voice of the Lord shaking the desert," that is, he stirred the nations to faith by converting them to it: Is. 54: "Many are the children of the desolate one" (that is, of the Gentile people) "more than of her who has a husband," that is, than of the synagogue. As to the second, he says, "The desert of Kadesh," which is interpreted as "holy of the law," because the Jews, sanctified through the lawgiver, will be converted at the end of the world: Is. 1: "Our land is desolate," etc. And this pertains to the gift of understanding. Next he recalls the benefit that pertains to promotion in good things. And first he sets forth the conferral of wisdom. Second, its act. He says therefore, "The voice of the Lord preparing the deer," that is, holy and perfect men; because just as deer repel venomous things, so the saints repel every sin; and just as deer pass through thorns without injury, so the saints pass through the vanity of the world without delight. Gen. 49: "Naphtali is a deer let loose, giving words of beauty." And these are prepared by God, not by themselves. And God himself "will reveal" to them "the dense things," that is, those things that are hidden from others: Mt. 11: "You have revealed them to little ones." And this pertains to the gift of wisdom. Next he concludes with thanksgiving for the aforesaid benefits, saying, "In his temple all will speak glory": Ps. 148: "Young men and maidens, old men with the younger, let them praise the name of the Lord." Another text has, "Everyone will speak or declare glory." It is true that each person has common gifts and also special ones. And for this special gift, each one will declare glory: Sir. 51: "To him who gives me justice, I will give glory."

[87045] "The Lord." Here he treats of the hoped-for benefits. And first he recalls the power of the benefactor. Second, he sets forth the hoped-for benefits, at "The Lord will give strength to his people." In the Hebrew it reads, "The Lord sat enthroned at the flood," and this has a plain sense. As if to say: it is true that he did this for the people of Israel. Was he not of the same power at some earlier time? Indeed, from the beginning of the world his judgments were manifest. And he recalls one manifest one: that by his judgment, on account of the sins of men, he brought about the flood. "And the Lord will sit as king forever," judging, namely, the peoples in equity. Jerome has, "The Lord inhabits the flood," or "causes it to be inhabited." When the flood inundated, the earth was emptied of inhabitants. Afterward, he again causes the earth, then devastated, to be inhabited through the multiplication of men. Mystically, this can be read in three ways. In one way, so that the word "flood" is, as it were, an accusative appended to the infinitive "to inhabit," because in Noah's ark only those people inhabited the flood. And so through Noah's ark the Church is signified, and the saints who are in it securely inhabit the flood of tribulations. In another way, conversely, as if "the flood inhabits in his temple." The flood represents the world and the carnal people of the world: Nah. 1: "With an overflowing flood he will make a complete end." He will therefore cause this flood to inhabit in his temple when they are converted. "And he will sit as king forever," as was explained above. In another way, "He inhabits the flood," that is, the baptismal waters, which he himself inhabits through the effect of grace. Next he recalls the hoped-for benefits. And first, those pertaining to progress. Second, to the end. As to the first, he says, "The Lord will give strength to his people," through which they can make progress: Is. 40: "He gives power to the fallen, and to those who had no strength," etc. As to the second, he says, "The Lord will bless his people with peace": Is. 32: "My people shall sit in the beauty of peace, in tents of confidence, in plentiful rest."
