Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 11
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 11

[86871] In the preceding decade the Psalmist treated of the persecution that he himself suffered from his son Absalom, through which was prefigured the persecution that Christ would suffer from Judas. In this second decade, however, as appears from the titles of certain Psalms, he treats of the persecution he suffered from Saul, through which was prefigured the persecution that Christ would suffer from the chief priests. This decade is divided into two parts. In the first he asks to be delivered from enemies. In the second, already delivered, he prays for his own exaltation, in the Psalm "May the Lord hear you," which indeed fits historically with David, because upon the death of Saul, David was advanced to king; and as to the mystery, it fits Christ, whose kingdom was established in His death. Phil. 2: "Therefore, because He became obedient to the Father even unto death, God exalted Him." In the first part he does two things. First he asks for deliverance. Second, he gives thanks for deliverance, and this in Psalm 17: "I will love you." Concerning the first he does three things. First he magnifies the malice of the persecutors. Second, he commemorates his own justice, at "Lord, who shall dwell." Third, on account of his justice he asks for the efficacy of being heard, at "hear, O Lord," etc. Concerning the first he does two things. First he reproves the deceitfulness of his adversaries. Second, he argues their iniquity, at "the fool has said." Concerning the first he does two things. First he commemorates their deceitfulness. Second, he asks for divine light, lest he be ensnared by them, at "how long, O Lord." This also fits well historically with David, against whom Saul proceeded deceitfully. He prefixes to this Psalm the title: "unto the end, for the octave, a Psalm of David," which has been explained above. Concerning the first he does three things. First he describes the commemoration of their deceitfulness; second, he asks for their destruction, at "may the Lord destroy"; third, he sets forth the reason for being heard, at "because of the misery," etc. Concerning the first he does two things. First he describes their deficiency; second, he adds a sign of the deficiency, at "they have spoken vain things." Concerning the first, it should be known that David, considering the malice of his adversary growing stronger against him, as though stupefied, first has recourse to divine help, saying, "O Lord, save me." And rightly so, because apart from Him there is no savior, as is said in Is. 45. Second, he enumerates their deficiencies. Now two things preserve a man from evil: namely, the fear of God -- Sir. 2: "He who fears God will keep His commandments" -- and the love of truth; because right works are called true, as if in conformity with a rule, and if they are not right, they pertain to disgrace. For some, even if they do not avoid evils through fear of God, are nevertheless restrained from them through fear of disgrace. But some fear neither disgrace; hence it is said in Lk. 18 of a certain man "who feared neither God nor respected any man." And the Psalmist excludes both of these from his adversaries. First, the fear of God, when he says, "because the holy one has failed"; for holiness consists in the fear and worship of God. Hence things dedicated to divine worship are called holy. As if to say: there is not found in this world a man who fears God. Mic. 7: "The holy one has perished from the earth, and there is no upright one among men." Second, he excludes the love of truth, when he says, "because truths are diminished." But the question must be asked: why does he say "truths" in the plural? Hos. 4: "There is no truth of God in the land." To which it must be said that there is one primordial truth, which is in the divine intellect. Jn. 14: "I am the way, the truth, and the life." But just as from one face of a man diverse likenesses are reflected in different mirrors, and similarly in one broken mirror, so in different souls diverse truths are reflected from the one divine truth. And similarly in one soul, because it does not attain to the simplicity of the divine but is composed of that by which it exists and what it is, there appear from that one truth by which the holy soul is illuminated diverse truths. These truths, when the soul departs from God through sins, are diminished. Or it must be said that he says "truths" on account of the threefold created truth that is in the saints: namely, truth of life, of which Is. 38 says: "Remember how I walked before you in truth." Truth of doctrine: Mt. 22: "We know that you are truthful and teach the way of God in truth." And truth of justice, of which Ex. 18 says: "Provide from among all the people capable men who fear God, in whom there is truth." This Psalm seems to speak of this truth, namely, the truth of justice, from which Saul had departed when he unjustly persecuted David. It must be said, therefore, that such truths have been diminished not from themselves, but "from among the children of men," through whose sins they are corrupted. And indeed the truth of life is diminished when good is judged to be evil. The truth of doctrine, when light is called darkness. The truth of justice, when bitter is judged sweet, and conversely. Is. 5: "Woe to you who call evil good, and good evil; who put darkness for light, and light for darkness; who put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter." He says that holiness fails, because since it comes from God through grace, it is immediately taken away by a single mortal sin. But truth is diminished, as it were, gradually. Jerome has: "because the merciful one has failed, and because the faithful are diminished," because mercy and justice are required toward neighbor. Prov. 20: "But a faithful man, who shall find?"

[86872] Then when he says, "vain things," he sets forth the sign of the failure of holiness; and it is twofold, namely vanity and deceitfulness. The first sign of failure is vanity; and with regard to this he says, "they have spoken vain things," etc. That is vain which has no substance. True things, therefore, under which no vanity lies, are firm. Hence 1 Tim. 1: "The end of the commandment is charity from a pure heart, a good conscience, and an unfeigned faith; from which some, straying, have turned aside to vain talking." Jer. 9: "Let each one guard himself from his neighbor." Gregory: "A vain word is an indication of a vain mind." Likewise, that is vain which is not grasped by the understanding; even superfluous words are vain. Prov. 14: "Where there are many words, there is frequently want." Likewise, that is vain which is not stable; and thus words about temporal things are vain. Jn. 3: "He who is of the earth speaks of the earth." Is. 29: "Your speech shall whisper out of the dust." But to whom do they speak vain things? To their neighbor, to whom they ought to speak the truth. Eph. 4: "Let each one of you speak truth with his neighbor." The second sign of the failure of holiness is deceitfulness; and with regard to this he says, "deceitful lips, with a double heart they have spoken." The doubling signifies a double heart. They show by their mouth that they have one thing, but in their heart they have another. They show sorrow and rejoice; they show love and hate; they feign compassion and exult. Jas. 1: "A double-minded man is inconstant in all his ways." Sir. 2: "Woe to the double heart and the wicked lips."

[86873] "May the Lord destroy." Here he asks for their destruction. And first he asks for it; second, he suggests the cause, at "all deceitful lips," etc. -- as though he would destroy them twice, namely in soul and body. Jer. 17: "Bring upon them the day of affliction, and with a double destruction destroy them, O Lord God." Then he sets forth the cause of their malice, and he mentions three things: namely, fraudulence, because of "deceitful lips" -- for deceit is when one does one thing and pretends another. Deceit is conceived in the heart but concealed by words or deeds. Prov. 12: "Deceit is in the heart of those who plot evil." God scatters these, because He uncovers them; for then it no longer has the character of deceit, since deceit is hidden malice. Hence he does not ask for their destruction, but for the detection of their malice. Or he asks for their perdition through grace. Prov. 19: "When the pestilent man is scourged, the fool shall become wiser." Hence he says, "deceitful lips." The Gloss says this is, as it were, the reason for the petition: deceitfulness. Or God will destroy them, as if punishing them for their malice, so that they themselves fall into it by God's just judgment, as is said of Haman in Est. 7, against Mordecai: "Haman was hanged on the gallows which he had prepared for Mordecai." Ezek. 3: "I will make your tongue cleave to the roof of your mouth, and you shall be mute," as though not daring to commit frauds any longer. Prov. 21: "When the pestilent man is punished, the little one becomes wiser." Likewise Prov. 22: "Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, and the rod of discipline shall drive it away." Second, he sets forth their boasting and their grandiloquent tongue, about themselves among those who consider them great. Ps. 72: "They set their mouth against heaven, and their tongue passed through the earth." Now what is greater in another we are accustomed to revere, and what is lesser we disregard. In order therefore to appear great and equal to God, they despise God, that is, divine honors. Thus it is said of the Antichrist that he speaks against the God of gods. 2 Thess. 2: "He opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God or is worshiped, so that he sits in the temple of God, showing himself as if he were God." And of Antiochus, 2 Macc. 9: "It is just to be subject to God, and a mortal should not think things equal to God." And Acts 12, of Herod, that the people acclaimed him with the voices of a god and not of a man. And lest they could be excused that they did not do it deliberately, he adds: "who have said," namely on purpose, "we will magnify our tongue." Third, he sets forth their blasphemy or pride: "our lips are our own." For this is the first species of pride, when someone considers that he has something from himself. 1 Sam. 2: "Do not multiply speaking lofty things, boasting." 2 Cor. 3: "We are not sufficient to think anything of ourselves, as from ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God." The second species of pride is when someone wishes to glory in something above others; hence he says, "who is our lord?" Job 21: "Who is the Almighty, that we should serve Him?" Hos. 7: "They have returned so as to be without a yoke, and they have become like a deceitful bow." Job 11: "A vain man is lifted up in pride, and thinks himself born free like a wild donkey's colt."

[86874] "Because of." Here, third, he sets forth the hearing of the prayer. And first he sets it forth; second, he establishes its certainty, at "the words of the Lord"; third, he sets forth his own belief, at "you, O Lord." He says therefore, "because of the misery," that is, the manifold need, "of the needy," that is, of those lacking resources, "and the groaning," that is, the sighs, "of the poor," that is, of those who have little. Ps. 9: "The poor man has been left to you." Ex. 2: "He heard their groaning and remembered His covenant." "Now I will arise, says the Lord." "Now," at the opportune time. Ps. 9: "A helper in due time, in tribulation." Is. 49: "In an acceptable time I have heard you, and in the day of salvation I have helped you." "I will set in your salvation," that is, I will place; "I will act confidently in it," that is, I will be in it. Jer. 1: "Do not be afraid before their face, because I am with you." Is. 14: "The Lord of hosts has decreed, and who can annul it? His hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?" Jer. 1: "They shall fight against you, and they shall not prevail, because I am with you to deliver you." And Jer. 39: "Your soul shall be saved, because you have put your trust in me, says the Lord." Then he sets forth the certainty of the promise: "the words of the Lord are pure words" -- not adulterated by admixture of anything foreign; or purified of superfluity; or incorrupt, because one is called chaste before experience, but continent after. Not vain, but firm. Mt. 24: "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away." Second, they are full of truth; hence, "silver tested by fire." Silver is white without stain, resonant without pretense, fragrant without corruption. "Tested by the earth," that is, from the earth; for the Greeks lack an ablative case. This is a translation from the Greek: "purified sevenfold," that is, perfectly. And the prophet responds: "You therefore, O Lord, will keep us from evil." "And you will guard us in good, from this generation forever." "Therefore the wicked walk round about," so that they never reach the end of the journey they intend, namely to afflict others as they wish. Is. 59: "Their paths are crooked." And why? "Because according to your height you have multiplied the children of men"; because in my house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but wooden and earthen ones; and some indeed are sanctified unto honor, prepared for every good work. 2 Tim. 2. Or "round about," in the circuit of vices, "the wicked walk," not reaching the mean of virtue. 1 Sam. 25: "The soul of your enemies shall be whirled," etc.
