Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 13
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 13

[86880] Above, the Psalmist reproached the deceitfulness of his enemies; here he sets forth their malice. The title is: "Unto the end, a Psalm of David." And concerning this he does two things. First he manifests their malice. Second he sets forth the hope of his liberation from them, at "Shall they not know," etc. And concerning the first he does two things. First he proposes their malice. Second he certifies that this malice is in them, at "The Lord from heaven," etc. The first is divided into two. First he proposes the root of their malice. Second the progress of their malice: "They are corrupt," etc. As it is said in Sir. 10: "The beginning of all sin is pride, and the beginning of man's pride is to fall away from God." That a man, therefore, does not have God in his heart is the principle of malice; and therefore he says, "The fool has said in his heart, there is no God": Wis. 1: "Wisdom will not enter into a malicious soul, nor dwell in a body subject to sins." But can he say this? To say in one's heart is to think. But can one think that God does not exist? Anselm says that no one can. Likewise Damascene. The knowledge of God is naturally implanted in all: no one can think that what is naturally known does not exist. But it should be known that we can speak about the knowledge of God in two ways: namely, according to himself, or as regards us. If in the first way, then without doubt it cannot be thought that he does not exist: for no proposition can by its nature be thought false whose predicate is included in the definition of the subject. It should be noted, however, that existence in God is different from existence in other things, because the existence of God is his substance. Therefore, whoever speaks of God according to himself, speaks of his existence; and therefore according to himself it cannot be thought that he does not exist. And the statement of Damascene is resolved: because what is naturally implanted is known indeterminately, namely that God exists, but not what God is; but this is held through faith. "God" is said from "Theos," which means "to burn away all malice." Therefore someone says that God does not exist when he thinks that he is not omnipotent, and that he does not have care of human affairs: Job 21: "Who is the Almighty, that we should serve him?" This can be referred to the Jews who said that Christ was a mere man, not God. Jn. 10: "You, being a man, make yourself God." These Jews, not believing in him who was promised in the law, say "there is no God" -- this one, namely, who preaches to us. And the fool said this, because they were unwilling to receive the wisdom of God, having the eyes of their mind blinded; Ps. 81: "They have not known, nor have they understood." Wis. 2: "For their own malice has blinded them." Or here the sinner is rebuked. First for the sin of the heart in consent, at "The fool has said." Second for the sin of action, at "They are corrupt." Third for the sin of habit, at "And they have become abominable." First he calls the sinner a fool; because he does not have wisdom, so that he says, etc. Likewise, because spiritual things have no savor for him; 1 Cor. 2: "The natural man does not perceive the things of God." Consequently, the progress of malice is set forth: "They are corrupt and have become abominable." Just as the two parts of justice are to do good and to avoid evil, so the two parts of injustice are to do evil and to avoid good. And first he sets forth the first part. Second, the second. Concerning the first, he sets forth two things. First, the perversity of vices. Second, their abomination. In bodies, corruption follows from the evaporation of natural heat expelled by an alien heat. For the natural heat of the soul is the love of God. When, therefore, the alien love of concupiscence and of other sins enters, God departs. And therefore, when he said "there is no God," he immediately adds "they are corrupt": Jer. 5: "They have denied God and said, It is not he," namely, the punisher of sinners, the rewarder of the just: Sir. 21: "The heart of the fool," namely of the sinner, "is like a broken vessel." They are corrupt, therefore -- sinners through evil action: Jn. 3: "Their works were evil" -- because after they lose gratuitous goods through consent, the natural goods in them are corrupted; and therefore punishment follows them: Ps. 96: "A fire shall go before him, and shall burn his enemies round about." Likewise, when a body putrefies, it becomes abominable. So the soul of a person, as long as the love of God is in it, is acceptable to God; but when it is corrupted through sin, it becomes abominable. What is abominable is that from which human appetite recoils: and therefore he says, "And they have become abominable," namely to God and men -- sinners through the habit of sinning: Jer. 2: "How exceedingly base have you become, repeating your ways." Hos. 9: "They were alienated in confusion, and became abominable like the things they loved." And he said "in their pursuits," because through these they arrive at abominable things. Or they do so studiously, according to Jerome. For God finds more abominable the studied willingness to sin than the sin itself: Job 34: "They have deliberately turned away from him, and would not understand any of his ways." Another reading has: "They have corrupted and made abominable their pursuit," namely of wisdom and discipline: Prov. 1: "They have held discipline hateful, and have not received the fear of the Lord": Ez. 8: "You shall see yet greater abominations." Consequently he treats of the avoidance of good. "There is none who does good," because "there is no just man on earth who does good and does not sin" (Eccl. 7). "Not even one," that is, except Christ, because he alone had neither contracted sin nor committed sin. The Blessed Virgin had contracted sin: Eccl. 7: "One man among a thousand I have found; a woman among all these I have not found." Or "not even one," because not even one person perfectly does good. This is true, given that they have said "there is no God," and "they are corrupt."

[86881] "The Lord." Here, first, he certifies the fault. Second, he expounds it, at "Their throat." Sin is certified through iniquity; and therefore here he sets forth God's investigation, saying: you say that there is no God; but this is false, because "the Lord has looked down from heaven upon the children of men": Prov. 16: "All the ways of man are open to his eyes." He looked down, therefore, by sending his Son -- the Lord the Father from heaven, that is, from the bosom of his loving-kindness: Is. 66: "Heaven is my throne." Or "from heaven," that is, Christ, through whom he will judge sinners. Or alternatively: some say that God does not know singulars and changeable things, because he is immaterial and simple and eternal. And so he does not know according to the movements of things, and according to the mode of his knowability. The response is: on the contrary, because he knows material things immaterially, as Dionysius concludes. And so also the intellect knows: and therefore he says "from heaven," that is, from the height of his dignity and nature. "He looked down upon the children of men." And he wishes to find in us -- by his antecedent will, by which he wills all to be saved -- that which pertains to salvation, namely that we may know God through the intellect and love him through the affections and desire him. And therefore he says, "that he may see," that is, "that he may make us see," because he himself always sees. "Whether there is one who understands," through the intellect: Deut. 32: "Would that they were wise and understood," etc. "Or seeks God," through the affections. What will he find when he has searched here? The contrary: because "all have turned aside"; and he sets forth three things: namely, a turning away from God, useless action, and cessation from good. He says, therefore, "All have turned aside," namely from God: Deut. 31: "I know that after my death you will act wickedly, and will turn aside from the way which I have commanded you": Hos. 4: "There is no truth, no knowledge, no mercy of God in the land": Jer. 8: "No one speaks what is good; there is none who does penance for his sin." Likewise, from the fact that one turns away from God, he becomes useless: because that is useless which does not attain that for which it was made. But man was made to enjoy God: Wis. 4: "The manifold brood of the wicked shall be of no use." Hence he says, "Together they have become useless." Likewise, they cease from good, because "there is none who does good," etc. This has already been expounded.

[86882] "Their throat." Jerome says that the Apostle makes use of the testimony of these verses, "their throat is an open sepulchre," etc. And it is found elsewhere in sacred Scripture, at Rom. 3, where he says that he took part from Is. 59, and another part from other parts of the Psalter, and not from this Psalm alone, since he himself was a Hebrew and knew that this is not found in the Hebrew; it is nevertheless found in the common edition, which the common people use, or which is not attributed to any particular person. From an open sepulchre a stench exhales; and therefore above the Psalmist certified the malice or fault of his enemies; here, however, he expounds it: and concerning this he does two things. First he shows how they are sinners harmful to others. Second, how to themselves, at "Destruction and unhappiness." Concerning the first, he proposes two things. First, how they harm others by word. Second, how by deed, at "Their feet are swift," etc. Concerning the first, he does two things. First he sets forth the readiness of their mouth to harm. Second, the mode of harming, at "With their tongues they acted deceitfully." He says, therefore: "Their throat is an open sepulchre." Such a thing is prepared for nothing else but to receive corpses: so the mouth of one who is always prepared to kill through detraction is an open sepulchre. Rev. 9: "From their mouths proceeded fire, and smoke, and brimstone." Or note their voracity, because the throat also serves for eating. But sometimes one harms by guile, sometimes by malice, and sometimes by injury. And first he sets forth the guile they have in their tongue. "With their tongues," speaking blandly on the outside: Jer. 9: "A wounding arrow is their tongue; it has spoken deceit." Second, guile in the heart: "The venom of asps is under their lips." Concealed venom is deadly, but the venom of asps is incurable and cannot be charmed: Ps. 57: "Like the deaf asp that stops its ears," etc. Its venom kills while one sleeps: Jer. 5: "Among my people are found wicked men lying in wait, as those who set snares to catch men." Ibid.: "As a decoy full of birds, so their houses are full of guile"; who attract birds to the snare by a sweet sound. In this is designated cruelty, obstinacy, and malice: cruelty, because they strive to kill; obstinacy, because hatred is always in their heart; and therefore he says, "the venom," etc.

[86883] "Whose mouth is full of cursing." Here he shows how they harm openly, because through detractory words: "and bitterness," that is, bitter words: Lev. 19: "You shall not curse the deaf." Or when one speaks words against God that provoke injury or wrath: Is. 5: "Their roaring is like that of a lion." "Their feet are swift." Here he shows how they harm by deed. "To shed blood": Prov. 1: "Their feet run to evil, and they hasten to shed blood."

[86884] "Destruction." Here he shows how they are harmful to themselves. A person harms himself in two ways: by losing the good that he has, and by failing to reach the good he hopes for. He says, therefore: "In their ways is destruction," because the good they have is crushed: "and unhappiness," because they do not arrive at the hoped-for good, namely happiness: Is. 59: "Devastation and destruction are in their ways, and they have not known the way of peace; there is no judgment in their steps." Or "destruction" in this world, "unhappiness" after death, which is opposed to happiness: Job 21: "The wicked man is reserved for the day of destruction, and he shall be led to the day of wrath." This comes from one thing that is against the love of neighbor, because "they have not known the way of peace," namely what it is. Or "they have not known the way of peace," namely Christ, because his ways are ways of peace: Prov. 3: "Her ways are beautiful ways, and all her paths are peaceful." They have not known, because by sinning they killed Christ himself. The other is against the love of God; hence he says, "There is no fear of God before their eyes": and from this they sin, because, as it is said in Prov. 16, "Through the fear of the Lord, everyone turns away from evil." Because, therefore, they do not have this, they are an open sepulchre.

[86885] "Shall they not." Here he treats of the hope of liberation. And first he shows that the wicked do not have hope, because "shall they not know." Second he shows what this hope is, at "Who shall give from Zion." Concerning the first, he does two things. First he shows that they will not know this hope. Second he sets forth a sign, at "The counsel of the poor man." First he raises a question, and interposes within it the fault of the wicked, and speaks thus. I say that they are an open sepulchre, and that God is not in their hearts: but shall they not know that the Lord is in the just generation? As if to say: they ought to know this, and that the Lord is in it: Jer. 14: "You are in our midst, O Lord, and your holy name," etc. Ps. 21: "But you dwell in the holy place, the praise of Israel." Therefore the Lord is in him as in a temple. "And all who work iniquity," namely against God, "who devour my people as the food of bread," as regards neighbors, whom they devour by taking away their goods: Zech. 11: "Let each one devour the flesh of his neighbor": Mic. 3: "They have eaten the flesh of my people and have flayed the skin from them": Sir. 34: "The bread of the needy is the life of the poor man: he who defrauds him of it is a man of blood." "They have not called upon God," that is, they have no hope in God: Is. 59: "They have not called upon God." And it follows from this that they have no security: therefore he says, "There they trembled," etc. Prov. 28: "The wicked man flees when no one pursues": Job 15: "The sound of terror is always in his ears, and when there is peace, he always suspects ambush." But those who call upon God are saved: Joel 2: "All who call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved": Prov. 18: "The name of the Lord is a most strong tower." Therefore such men will not know that the Lord is in the just generation. And he shows this by a sign: because "you have confounded the counsel of the poor man," that is, you have considered it contemptible and have blasphemed it as far as you were able: and this is the counsel of the poor man, that he may know that the Lord is his hope: Ps. 21: "He hoped in the Lord; let him deliver him, let him save him, since he desires him" (Mt. 27). He who says, "If you wish to be perfect," etc. (Mt. 19). This counsel the rich always despise: Prov. 1: "You have despised all my counsel, and have neglected my reproofs." And whence? "Because the Lord is his hope": because they have nothing in the world from which they may hope except in God, who is the hope of the saints.

[86886] All the ancients expected this. Gen. 49: "The scepter shall not be taken from Judah," etc. But this was expected from Zion, that is, from the Jews: Jn. 4: "Salvation is from the Jews." But when? The answer: we shall have this "when the Lord shall have turned away the captivity of his people," who are in the captivity of sin and the prison of Hell: Is. 49: "Indeed, the captive shall be taken from the strong, and what was seized by the mighty shall be rescued." "And then let Jacob be glad," that is, the people of God inwardly; "and let Israel rejoice" outwardly.
