Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 15
===========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 15

[86892] In the preceding Psalm he enumerated the just deeds that God requires of man; here, however, he shows how he followed justice. The title is this: "The inscription of the title of David himself." And according to the literal sense, it signifies that it was composed specifically about those things which pertain to the person of David. But because David also bore the person of Christ who was to be born from his seed, therefore certain things here are said of David, and certain things of Christ. And therefore Peter, in Acts 2, says: "I foresaw the Lord," etc. He says that it was properly said of the resurrection of Christ, and not of David. And according to this, the Psalm touches upon history in the New Testament, inasmuch as it is said in Jn. 18 that when Christ was crucified, Pilate placed a title above his head: "This is Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the Jews": and this is, as it were, the title of his kingdom. A threefold title was customarily inscribed. Sometimes on someone's tomb: "This is the tomb of so-and-so." Sometimes on a house: "This is the house of so-and-so." Sometimes for a triumph, as was done in Rome: and this title is Christ's, who triumphed through the cross: Col. 2: "Triumphing over them openly in himself, despoiling principalities and powers." It is signified here, therefore, that in this Psalm the kingdom of Christ is specifically treated. Jerome's title is this: "A Psalm of the humble and simple David." And it signifies that in this Psalm the simplicity and humility of David are treated, whether of the individual or of the one prefigured, namely Christ. This Psalm, therefore, is divided into two parts. In the first he shows -- whether speaking on his own behalf or on behalf of Christ -- that he clings to God alone. Second, he commemorates the benefits he has received from God, at "I will bless the Lord who," etc. The first pertains to simplicity, the second to humility. Concerning the first, he does two things. First he shows that he clings to God alone. Second he assigns the reason, at "The Lord is the portion," etc. Concerning the first, he does three things. First he shows how he relates to God. Second, how he relates to the saints of God. Third, how he relates to the enemies of God. The second, at "To the saints." The third, at "Their infirmities are multiplied," etc. He relates to God as one who clings to him alone: and this in two ways -- through hope and faith, at "I said to the Lord." Concerning the first, he proposes two things: namely, the sign of hope, and hope itself. The sign of hope, at "Preserve me, O Lord": as if to say, I do not trust that I can be preserved by myself, but you, O Lord, preserve me, either in himself or in his members: Jn. 17: "Father, keep them in your name, those whom you have given me." And this, "because I have hoped in you." But did Christ hope? It must be said that yes: he hoped indeed for eternal life for others, and for himself the glory of the body. But the glory of the soul he had from the instant of his conception. "I said," etc. Here first he sets forth the act of faith. Second he assigns the reason, at "Because you have no need of my goods," etc. The act of faith is to confess God, either in the heart by believing, or outwardly by praising, or by approving with deeds: Rom. 10: "With the heart one believes unto justice, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation"; and therefore, "I said," in heart, mouth, and deed, "you are my God": Gen. 28: "The Lord shall be my God." And therefore it is so because "you have no need of my goods." And this is proper to God: because he is of infinite goodness, and nothing can be added to him, because he is the substantial good extending his goodness to all things like the sun extends its light -- not by participation, but by his very being, illuminating all things. But to any other creature something can be added, even to the saints, and for this reason something accrues to them, and therefore in some way they need us: but God alone does not need our goods: Job 35: "If you act justly, what will you give him, or what will he receive from your hand?" Jerome has: "Because there is no good for us without you": as if to say, from this it is clear that you are my God, because you are goodness, and there is no good for me without you.

[86893] "To the saints." Here he shows how he relates to the saints -- as is also read from the person of Christ. And it should be known that the will of the Father is as the will of Christ, and insofar as he is man, it is to fulfill the will of the Father: Ps. 39: "To do your will, O my God, I have desired": 1 Thess. 4: "This is the will of God, your sanctification": Jn. 6: "I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me, the Father, that of all that he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up on the last day." Christ, moreover, willed many things: and this for our benefit. But what did he will? To suffer, to die, to rise again, in order to give us life. He says, therefore: God the Father has made all my desires wonderful, that is, has wonderfully fulfilled them, "in them" -- in whom? In them, "in the saints who are in his land," that is, in the Church militant and triumphant. Jerome has it thus: "To the saints who are in the land and to the mighty, all my desire is in them." Another reading has "the strong." And granted that some earthly person might trust in the power of a strong army, David says, "I have hoped in you": Sir. 2: "No one has hoped in the Lord and been confounded." And "my strong ones are your saints," who do great things: Ps. 100: "My eyes are upon the faithful," says Christ, "that they may sit with me." That Christ himself loves the saints is clear: Prov. 8: "I love those who love me."

[86894] "Their infirmities are multiplied." Here he shows how he relates to the adversaries of God, or to sinners. And first he sets forth their conversion; second, the manner of conversion, at "I will not gather." Concerning the first, he does two things. First he proposes the state of their preceding fault; second he sets forth the state of subsequent grace, at "Afterwards they hastened." He says, therefore, "Their infirmities are multiplied," that is, their diverse sins. Or "infirmities," that is, the penalties consequent upon sin. Lam. 1: "My groans are many." And from this it follows that "afterwards they hastened," that is, they strove to heal their life, in order to redeem the time lost. And they do this notably because "where sin abounded, grace abounded all the more," as it says in Rom. 5. Likewise, after tribulations man runs to God. Hos. 6: "In their tribulation they will rise early to me: come, let us return to the Lord." Ps. 82: "Fill their faces with shame, and they will seek your name, O Lord."

[86895] "I will not." Here he sets forth the manner of conversion. And first he shows to what rite they are converted; second, how perfectly, at "Nor will I be mindful," etc. He says, therefore, "They hastened." But how will they be converted? In the Old Law, those who were converted offered various sacrifices. But I will gather from diverse parts to the faith; but not so that they may shed blood: because, as the Apostle says in Heb. 10, "It is impossible that sins be taken away by the blood of bulls or goats." "I will not gather their assemblies from blood offerings," that is, from the rite of the law: but this gathering is from the new blood, that is, of Christ. Heb. 9: "Christ was offered once to exhaust the sins of many." Heb. 10: "By one offering he has perfected forever those who are sanctified," etc. Zech. 9: "You also, by the blood of your covenant, have sent forth your prisoners out of the pit in which there is no water," etc. But how perfect will this gathering be? "Because I will not be mindful of their names," which they had in the state of sin, because one was called a fornicator, another a thief. But after conversion, no one should be so named, because such names are blotted out. Or "I will not be mindful" of their sins in the judgment when I shall gather the just: "Come, blessed ones" (Mt. 25). And this "through my lips," or through my preachers. But to them it will be said, "Depart, accursed," etc. Jer. 15: "If you separate the precious from the vile, you shall be as my mouth." Jerome has: "Their idols are multiplied; those who follow after them -- I will not pour out their libations of blood, nor will I take up their names upon my lips"; as if to say, I worship you, not idols. But their idols are many. Hos. 8: "I have multiplied those who depart from you." Jer. 2: "They have turned their back to me and not their face, nor will I be a partaker of their libations." Deut. 32: "From whose sacrifices they ate the fat, and drank the wine of libations." Nor will I swear by those idols.

[86896] "The Lord." Here he assigns the reason for his clinging to God alone, because he alone is his inheritance; as if to say, I cling to him alone because this is my inheritance. First he says that God is his inheritance. Second he commends it, saying that he is content with it, at "For indeed my inheritance," etc. God himself is our good in which we rejoice: men in this world seek possessions and the use of them, but his possession is God; hence "the Lord is the portion of my inheritance," in the intransitive sense, that is, the inheritance that comes to me as my portion. Some have pleasures of the flesh as their inheritance. Wis. 2: "This is our portion and this is our lot." Others have other delightful things of the world; but God is my lot. Lam. 3: "The Lord is my portion, said my soul." But he is not only my inheritance, but "the portion of my cup," that is, my cup coming to me by lot; because all my delight and drink is God. Ps. 22: "My cup which inebriates, how goodly it is." Or Christ has the faithful as his inheritance; and the portion of this inheritance, namely of the faithful, is God, as has been said: "The Lord is the portion of my cup," because my passion is ordered to God. He also is the giver of this inheritance: "It is you who will restore my inheritance to me," namely of eternal glory. And so Christ speaks from the person of his own, who lost it when the first parent sinned. Or "my inheritance," that is, the glory of the body, which man lost by sinning. "Lines have been stretched out for me in splendid places." The rich measure land with a line. Deut. 32: "Jacob is the line of his inheritance." And therefore "portion" is called, as it were, "the line of a cord," that is, my portion falls to me in the best things, because nothing is better than God himself. Jer. 3: "I will give you a desirable land, a splendid inheritance." Second he shows that he is content with it: "For indeed my inheritance is splendid to me"; as if to say, not only is my inheritance splendid in itself, but it is so splendid to me that I would in no way exchange it. Ps. 131: "This is my rest forever and ever: here I will dwell, because I have chosen it."

[86897] "I will bless." Above, the Psalmist set forth the reason why he clings to God alone, namely because God is the portion of his inheritance; here he acknowledges benefits. And first he proposes benefits received; second, benefits to be hoped for, at "Moreover, also my flesh." Concerning the first, he does two things. First he commemorates benefits received; second he shows the joy he has from them, at "Therefore my heart has been glad." He commemorates, therefore, a twofold benefit: one in the attainment of good, another in being preserved against evils. As to the first he says, "I will bless the Lord," etc., that I may understand how splendid is that eternal inheritance. Ps. 118: "Give me understanding, and I will search out," etc. Ps. 31: "I will give you understanding, and I will instruct you." Sir. 51: "To him who gives me wisdom I will give glory." The Lord, moreover, gave man reason for wisdom, but did not totally remove infirmity; but this will be the case in glory. And first he proposes it; second he sets forth the remedy against it, at "I set the Lord before me." Every man has from God, according to reason, the light of the intellect, and the just man is reformed by the light of grace. But the infirmity of the flesh still remains; and therefore he says, "Moreover, even my reins have rebuked me, until the night," that is, my infirmities, namely faults or sins. And this "until the night," that is, until death, "my reins have rebuked me," that is, they have shown me to be blameworthy. Another reading says that because the incentive to lust has its seat in the loins, it thus disturbs by tempting with pleasure. 2 Cor. 12: "Lest the greatness of the revelations," etc. But in Christ there are no infirmities of fault or of infection, because his flesh does not resist his spirit; and therefore it is understood only of punishment. Heb. 4: "Tempted in all things," as to bodily infirmities. But if it is understood of us, it should be said that the man who has the gift of understanding, or grace, should say with the Apostle, Rom. 7: "I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind." Or "reins," that is, the Jews related to him, "until the night," that is, until the passion, or until the passibility of the flesh. And because the flesh feared the passion, I, in that passion, "set the Lord before me," with eyes raised to heaven, not to the world. Providence is the foreseeing of things to happen in the future; but vision or sight is of things present. But if such loins still assail, one should not fear, because one has the help of God ready. And therefore first he sets forth the remembrance of the help, saying, "I set the Lord before me," etc., namely when "my reins rebuked me." Ps. 24: "My eyes are always toward the Lord, because," etc. And this is because "he is at my right hand, that I may not be moved," not to the left. Prov. 3: "The Lord will be at your side, and will keep your foot lest you be caught." Is. 50: "Let us stand together," etc. "Therefore my heart has been glad." 1 Sam. 2: "My heart has rejoiced in the Lord." Ps. 63: "The just man shall rejoice in the Lord," etc. "And my tongue has rejoiced," etc., outwardly, when exterior joy breaks forth into vocal praise. Is. 12: "Sing to the Lord, for he has done great things." Ps. 80: "Rejoice in God," etc.

[86898] "Moreover." Here he enumerates the benefits to be hoped for. First as to the resurrection of the flesh; second as to the soul, at "You have made known." The first is divided into two. First he sets forth the hope of resurrection; second, the manner, at "Because you will not abandon." He says, therefore: you have given me understanding, and you have stood by me as a man, but "moreover, also my flesh shall rest in hope" of resurrection. Ps. 3: "I have slept and taken my rest, and I have risen again." And also my flesh shall have hope in the resurrection. Wis. 3: "Their hope is full of immortality." The reason is that resurrection requires the union of body and soul; and therefore the soul joined to divinity should not have remained in Hell; but it had to stay there only until the truth of his humanity and true flesh was proven: nor was it fitting for it to be left in Hell, where it had descended to free the saints. Sir. 24: "I will penetrate all the lower parts of the earth, and I will visit all who sleep, and I will enlighten all," etc. Likewise, from the side of the body, because "nor will you give your holy one," that is, my body sanctified by you, "to see corruption," that is, of putrefaction or dissolution, which he did not suffer; but he did suffer the corruption of death. The benefits that pertain to the soul he commemorates when he says, "You have made known." This refers to Christ for his members, and these are the teachings and precepts that are the way to beatitude. Prov. 7: "Keep my commandments, and you shall live"; and therefore he says, "You have made known to me the ways of life." Second he commemorates the benefit: where he says three things. First, the full vision of God: "You shall fill me with joy with your countenance," that is, I shall see your face. 1 Cor. 13: "Now I know in part," that is, imperfectly; "then I shall know face to face." Full joy: Jn. 16: "That your joy may be full": because the delights are unfailing, because "at your right hand even to the end." Is. 51: "Everlasting joy shall be upon their heads; they shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away." Prov. 3: "Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left hand, riches and glory."
