Exposition on the Psalms of David - Commentary on Psalm 8
==========================================================

Commentary on Psalm 8

[86837] Above he set forth a Psalm in which David prayed concerning his persecution; here he sets forth a Psalm of thanksgiving: and first a Psalm is presented for the benefits bestowed upon the whole human race. Second, another for the benefits bestowed upon him for the destruction of enemies, or for the goods granted. Third, for the evils removed, at "I will give thanks": for here he expresses the affection of a man considering the benefits of God bestowed upon the human race, and giving thanks. The title is "Unto the end, a Psalm of David, for the winepresses," and since the rest has been explained above, I shall explain here only the last part. Here it should be noted that in Dt. 16 it says: "Seven days you shall celebrate the feast of tabernacles, when you gather in your produce from the threshing floor and the winepress," etc. For it should be known that David had a special devotion in celebrating the feasts, and he did something special for the praise of God. Now the feast of tabernacles was the principal one. And this took place during the vintage in commemoration of the divine benefit, when he led the children of Israel out of Egypt in tents, and brought them into the promised land where there are fruits: and therefore it was necessary that they have the most beautiful fruits, at which time were the winepresses; and therefore it says "for the winepresses." This is the literal sense. But spiritually, the winepress is the Church: Is. 5: "He planted a choice vineyard, he built a winepress in it"; Mt. 21: "He planted a vineyard, and dug a winepress in it." He says therefore "for the winepresses," that is, for the Churches of the world: and the Church is called a winepress, because just as in a winepress the wine is separated from the grape skins, so in the Church the good are separated from the wicked by the work of ministers: even if not always in place, yet in disposition. For the same reason it is also called a threshing floor: because there the grain is separated from the chaff. Likewise, from the words literally set down, the spiritual sense is separated. Likewise the winepresses are the martyrdoms, in which the separation of souls from bodies takes place, while the bodies of those who are trampled by affliction and persecution for the name of Christ remain crushed on the earth, but their souls flow forth to rest in the heavens. This Psalm is divided into two parts. First the Psalmist marvels at the divine excellence. Second, at his clemency, at "What is man." Concerning the first he does two things. First he shows that the majesty of God is admirable. Second, that it is manifest, at "Out of the mouths of infants." Concerning the first he does two things: first he sets him forth as wonderful. Second he makes clear the reason for what was said, at "For your magnificence is elevated," etc. He says therefore, "Lord" of all: Esth. 13: "You are Lord of all"; but especially "our Lord," we who worship you, who cling to you. Jerome has "our Ruler": Jgs. 8: "I will not rule over you, nor shall my son, but the Lord shall rule over you." "How admirable is your name," etc., namely of your divinity: Ps. 92: "Wonderful are the surges of the sea," etc. Gen. 32: "Why do you ask my name, which is wonderful?" Likewise, of the incarnate Christ: Is. 9: "His name shall be called Wonderful." But is it only in Judea, as the Jews say, or in Africa, as the Donatists claim? No; but "in all the earth": Mal.: "From the rising of the sun to its setting, great is my name among the nations." The reason for the wonder is added: "For your magnificence is elevated," because in the heavens your greatness appears. Wonder occurs when someone sees an effect and is ignorant of the cause. Therefore something is wonderful in two ways: either because the cause is totally unknown, or because it does not produce an effect that perfectly manifests the cause. The first is not the case with God: because he produces an effect: Rom. 1: "The invisible things of God are known through the things that have been made," etc. He produces, I say, an effect, yet not one that perfectly manifests the cause: and therefore he remains admirable: and this is what he says: "your magnificence," that is, your praise or your power, which can do great things, "is elevated above the heavens," surpassing the making of the heavens beyond all proportion. Hence he excludes the error of those who say that God is the form of the heaven: for according to this he would be proportionate to the heavens. Likewise of those who say that he acts by necessity of nature: because he would not extend himself above the heavens: yet he can make something infinitely greater. Or "above the heavens," that is, above the Scriptures, because he is more than is praised in the Scriptures: Sir. 43: "Glorifying God as much as you can, he will still surpass it, and admirable is his magnificence." Or "your magnificence," that is, your Son, God and man, "is elevated" in the ascension "above the heavens": Eph. 4: "He who descended is the same who ascended above all the heavens," etc.

[86838] Then when he says "Out of the mouths," he shows that it is most manifest. And first he shows the manifestation. Second, the reason for it, at "For I shall see." That it is manifest he proves, because that is manifest which is implanted in all people, however simple they may be, as if by a kind of natural knowledge. For there is a twofold kind of people who follow the natural and right instinct, namely the simple and the wise. That the wise should know God is not a great thing; but that the simple should, that is remarkable. But there are some who pervert the natural instinct: and these repel the knowledge of God: Ps. 81: "They did not know," that is, they willed not to know, "nor did they understand," etc. Job 22: "They said to God, Depart from us; we do not want the knowledge of your ways." But God brings it about that through those, that is, through the simple, who follow the natural instinct, those who pervert the natural instinct are confounded. By "infants" the simple are designated: 1 Pet. 2: "As newborn infants, reasonable, without guile," etc. He says therefore: admirable indeed is your name, yet in such a way that "out of the mouths of infants and sucklings you have perfected praise," you who inwardly prompt them to this: and this "on account of your enemies," who oppose your knowledge and understanding: Phil. 3: "Enemies of the cross of Christ," etc. "That you may destroy the enemy and the avenger," every persecutor. Or Pharaoh who would take vengeance against one confessing your name: 2 Cor. 10: "Destroying counsels, and every height that exalts itself against the knowledge of God." Or the tyrant who assails your holy name with arms: 1 Pet. 2: "That by doing well you may silence the ignorance of imprudent men." Christ did this: for in Mt. 21, concerning the children of the Hebrews, Christ responded that from their words praise was perfected, who by the prompting of the Holy Spirit were praising: which nonetheless seemed to be done childishly. This applies when the simple acknowledge God, and others pervert the studies of natural knowledge, lest they know God himself. Likewise this applies to the apostles who were without learning and uneducated: Acts 4: "Simple as doves": Mt. 10: "And as sheep in the midst of wolves"; and they destroyed all the enemies of Christ. 1 Cor. 1: "The foolish things of the world God has chosen, that he might confound the wise, and the weak things," etc.

[86839] Next he attaches the reason for this manifestation, saying "For." Cicero says in the book On the Nature of the Gods, and it was also said by Aristotle, although it is not found in his books that we have, that if any man were to enter a palace which he saw well arranged, there is no one so senseless that, even though he did not see how it was made, he would not perceive that it was constructed by someone. We enter the world, and we do not see how it was made; but from the very fact that it is so well ordered, we ought to perceive that it was made by someone. And the order of the heavenly bodies shows this especially. There were some who erred by attributing the causes of things to the necessity of matter; hence they say that all things were made on account of the hot and cold, the dry and moist, like the elements which thus came together. But if this could have some appearance of truth in other things, in no way can it hold for the heavenly bodies: because it cannot be attributed to the necessity of matter that this body is so far distant from that one, and that they complete their courses in such and such a time. This can only be traced back to an intellectual cause. And therefore Scripture, when it wishes to manifest the power of God, brings us to the consideration of the heavens. Is. 40: "Lift up your eyes on high, and see who created these things": therefore he says, "For I shall see your heavens, the works of your fingers." He says "the works of fingers" for three reasons: because what we do with our fingers, we do attentively and distinctly. And the things to be considered about the heavenly bodies can only be traced back to an intelligible cause; and therefore he says "the works of your fingers": Ps. 135: "Who made the heavens in understanding." Or it corresponds to what he says, "elevated." When someone causes something heavy to be raised, he puts his shoulder under it; but when he causes something light to be raised, he puts his finger under it; and therefore he says "the works of fingers," as though it were easy for him to make the heavens: Is. 40: "Who has weighed the mass of the earth with three fingers, and balanced the heavens with the palm of his hand?" Or because what we do with fingers are delicate works. To show therefore that these are more delicate than other things, he says "the works of fingers," etc. He names the moon, and not the sun, on account of the pagans, who believed the sun was the supreme god: and therefore he specifically names "the moon and the stars," in which there is no obvious basis for error: Sir. 43: "The beauty of heaven is the glory of the stars, the Lord illuminating the world on high." Mystically, the apostles or the Scriptures are the works of fingers. Three fingers are three persons; as if to say, the works of the whole Trinity, or of the Holy Spirit. The moon is the Church: the stars are the teachers. And these God established.

[86840] "What." Above the Psalmist marveled at the excellence of the divine majesty; and now he commemorates two benefits divinely bestowed upon men. Second, from this he concludes the Psalm in praise, at "Lord, our Lord," etc. Concerning the first he does three things. First he shows the clemency of God toward men by comparison with those things which are above men. Second, by comparison with the first man, at "with glory and honor." Third, by comparison with those things which are below man, at "and you have set him." Above man there is a twofold nature: namely, the divine and the angelic. First therefore he sets forth the benefits by comparison with God. Second, by comparison with the angels, at "you have diminished him." First let it be explained as it pertains to natural benefits. Second, as to gratuitous gifts. And according to the first mode and concerning it he does two things. First he sets forth God's special care for man. Second, the special familiarity, at "or the son of man." It is wonderful that someone great should be joined to someone small by a special familiarity: and therefore the Psalmist first commemorates the smallness of man from his condition: "What is man," so small a thing? Job 14: "Man born of woman"; and 25: "Man is rottenness, and the son of man is a worm." Second, as to his origin: because he is also lowly: Job 14: "Who can make clean what was conceived of unclean seed?"; and 10: "Did you not, like milk," etc. And therefore he says, "or the son of man?" But to this one so small, so lowly, he says that he does two things: namely, that he is mindful of him, and that he visits him. The first pertains to care. The second to special familiarity. And this is the manner of speaking: as if some craftsman had made great things, and among them one very small thing, namely a needle, and when he made the needle he showed that he had knowledge of it. But that in the arrangement of his works he should care about the needle would be very wonderful; and therefore he says, "What is man, that among your great creatures you are mindful of him?" Sir. 16: "Do not say, I shall be hidden from God," etc. "and what is a soul," etc. Because on account of its smallness God does not forget you. But what is so great about this? For God has care of all things: Wis. 12: "For there is no other than you, whose care is for all." It must be said that he has a special care for man, namely that in the judgment his acts are rewarded: Job 14: "Do you think it fitting to open your eyes upon such a one," etc. Likewise he not only has care for man, but has familiarity with him; and this is what he says, "that you visit him." Only rational nature is capable of God, by knowing and loving him. Insofar therefore as God becomes present to us through love or knowledge, he visits us: Job 10: "Your visitation has preserved," etc. So therefore the clemency of God is great in the comparison of man to God.

[86841] But there follows concerning man in comparison to the angels, to whom man is found to be close. "You have diminished him." In the angels the image of God is found through a simple intuition of truth, without inquiry; but in man through discursive reasoning; and therefore in man it is somewhat diminished. Hence it is that men are called angels: Mal. 2: "They shall seek the law from his mouth, because he is the angel of the Lord of hosts." Man is also corruptible, but only slightly; because at some time man in the fatherland will know all things without discursive reasoning; and he will be incorruptible in body: 1 Cor. 15: "This corruptible body must put on incorruption." Next he shows the clemency of God toward man by comparison with man himself, when he says "with glory and honor," etc. To be crowned belongs to kings. God made man as the king of lower things, and there is "glory," namely the brightness of the divine image: and this is a certain crown of man: 1 Cor. 11: "Man is the image and glory of God": Ps. 4: "The light of your countenance, O Lord, is signed upon us." But he is honored who is not subject to anything. For man is subject to no natural bodily creature as regards his soul, neither in his coming into being nor in his progress: not in his coming into being, because he is not produced by a creature, and he acts freely; nor does he perish with the body; and in this the honor of man consists; and therefore it says in Wis. 2: "Nor did they judge the honor of holy souls," etc., up to "he made him": Ps. 48: "Man, when he was in honor, did not understand," etc. Next, when he says "you have set him," he sets forth the clemency of God toward man by comparison with those things which are below man, because he willed that man have dominion over these lower things: and concerning this he does three things. First he proposes the dominion. Second, the capacity for ruling. Third, the number of subjects. The second, at "you have subjected all things." The third, at "the sheep and the oxen." He says therefore: since man is king, you have given him dominion "over the works of your hands": Gen. 1: "That he may rule over the fish of the sea, and the birds of the air, and the beasts of the whole earth, and every creeping thing that moves upon the earth." He has this through reason, because he excels all animals: and therefore as soon as he said "with glory and honor," he added, "you have set him," that is, you gave him dominion. But note that he says man has authority over the works of the "hands," not of the "fingers"; because these are not so delicate as the heavens, which are the works of the fingers. Man cannot subject these to himself; and therefore second he shows the capacity for ruling. "All things," he says, "you have subjected," so that he might preside and rule at his will. This is signified in Gen. 2, where God brought all the animals to Adam. And this subjection was complete before sin; but some things now resist as a punishment for sin. Third, when he says "the sheep and the oxen," etc., he enumerates the subjects: and he lists animals so that plants may be understood as well. Among the animals, some are subject according to their whole kind, namely the tame and domestic animals by their nature, that is, sheep and oxen: and he says this in the feminine, "all of them," because herds are made up especially of cows and sheep. Others are those not subject according to their whole kind: and of these some are walking creatures: and regarding this he says "moreover the beasts of the field," etc., that is, boars, deer, and the like: some are flying creatures, that is, birds: and some are swimming creatures, that is, fish. These can also be referred to the benefits of grace: and then in these all the mysteries of Christ are enumerated. First, of the incarnation: "What is man?" He touches on two things: namely, the cause of the incarnation, and the incarnation itself: and he says, "What is man?" For God seemed to have forgotten man when he expelled him from Paradise: he remembers man of this kind when he is brought back to that of Ps. 105: "Remember us, O Lord." And so the incarnation follows: because he "visits"; and therefore he says "or the son of man," etc. Because although he visited the whole human race, he especially visited that man assumed into the unity of the hypostasis: Heb. 2: "He never took hold of angels, but of the seed of Abraham." The second is the passion. "You diminished him" on account of the passion. Heb. 2: "Him who was made a little lower than the angels," etc. In the Hebrew it reads: "And you diminish him a little from God": because he was joined to God in the unity of person; but diminished on account of the passibility he assumed. The third is the benefit of the resurrection in the honor shown to the apostles, which he enumerates through the passion: Phil. 2: "That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow," etc. Jn. 5: "That all may honor the Son, just as they honor the Father." The fourth mystery is the ascension: "You have set him over," etc. Eph. 1: "Setting him at his right hand, above every principality and power," etc. The fifth mystery is the coming for judgment: "you have subjected all things," etc., that is, you have established him as judge over all things: Heb. 2: "But now we do not yet see all things subjected to him": then all things will be subjected under his feet, that is, under his humanity, because the head of Christ is God, 1 Cor. 11. And the feet are the humanity: Jn. 5: "He gave him power to execute judgment." And in the judgment some are good: and of these some subjects are signified by sheep: 2 Kgs. 24: "These who are sheep, what have they done?" Some are prelates, and these are signified by oxen: Prov. 14: "Where there are many harvests, there the strength of the ox is manifest." Some are wicked: and of these there are three kinds: 1 Jn. 2: "Everything that is in the world is either the concupiscence of the eyes, or the concupiscence of the flesh, or the pride of life." And first he sets forth the lustful: and these are the sheep and oxen and beasts of the field, because they delight in bestial things: Joel 1: "The beasts have rotted in their dung, and the storehouses of the field are demolished." He says this because they go by the broad way, Mt. 7. Second, the proud, the birds: Mt. 13: "The birds of the air devoured it": Dt. 32: "They shall be devoured by birds with a most bitter bite." Third, the greedy, who "traverse the paths of the sea," literally; or of the world: Ps. 11: "The wicked walk round about": Job 1: "I have gone around the earth, and walked through it." Just as God is admirable for the eminence of his majesty, so he is shown to be admirable from his clemency; and therefore he concludes with wonder: "Lord, our Lord," etc. Yet it should be known that this Psalm is circular, because it has the same verse at the beginning and at the end. Some are semicircular, because they do not repeat the whole verse, but a part; such as "Bless the Lord, O my soul," whose end is "in every place of his dominion."